Title: 2603.11683v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.11683v1

Published Time: Fri, 13 Mar 2026 00:39:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
Causal Prosody Mediation for Text -to -Speech: 

# Counterfactual Training of Duration, Pitch, and Energy in FastSpeech2 

## Suvendu Sekhar Mohanty 

Arlington, Virginia, USA 

## Abstract 

We propose a novel causal prosody mediation framework for expressive text -to -speech (TTS) synthesis. Our approach augments the 

FastSpeech2 architecture with explicit emotion conditioning and introduces counterfactual training objectives to disentangle emot ional 

prosody from linguistic content. By formulating a structural causal model of how text (content), emotion, and speaker jointly influence 

prosody (duration, pitch, energy) and ultimately the speech waveform, we derive two complementary loss terms: an I ndirect Path Constraint 

(IPC) to enforce that emotion affects speech only through prosody, and a Counterfactual Prosody Constraint (CPC) to encourage distinct 

prosody patterns for different emotions. The resulting model is trained on multi -speaker emotiona l corpora (LibriTTS, EmoV -DB, VCTK) 

with a combined objective that includes standard spectrogram reconstruction and variance prediction losses alongside our caus al losses. In 

evaluations on expressive speech synthesis, our method achieves significantly imp roved prosody manipulation and emotion rendering, with 

higher mean opinion scores (MOS) and emotion accuracy than baseline FastSpeech2 variants. We also observe better intelligibil ity (low 

WER) and speaker consistency when transferring emotions across spea kers. Extensive ablations confirm that the causal objectives 

successfully separate prosody attribution, yielding an interpretable model that allows controlled counterfactual prosody edit ing (e.g. "same 

utterance, different emotion") without compromising na turalness. We discuss the implications for identifiability in prosody modeling and 

outline limitations such as the assumption that emotion effects are fully captured by pitch, duration, and energy. Our work d emonstrates how 

integrating causal learning prin ciples into TTS can improve controllability and expressiveness in generated speech. 

## 1. Introduction 

Recent advances in end -to -end TTS have achieved 

remarkable speech naturalness (Ren et al., 2021; Wang et al., 

2017). However, generating expressive speech —conveying 

nuances of prosody (rhythm, intonation) and emotion —

remains challenging. In conventional TT S, a given text can 

be spoken in many plausible ways (the one -to -many mapping 

problem), and controlling how it is spoken (e.g. happily vs 

sadly) is an open research problem. Modern non -

autoregressive models like FastSpeech2 (FS2) tackle one -to -

many mapping by introducing variance predictors for 

duration, pitch, and energy. These features inject prosodic 

variation into the generated speech and have been shown to 

correlate with expressive aspects (e.g. pitch is a key feature 

to convey emotions). Nonetheless, out -of -the -box FS2 is not 

explicitly emotion -aware —it does not use emotion labels 

during training, and any expressiveness must emerge 

implicitly. 

To explicitly model and control emotional expression in 

TTS, prior works have conditioned synthesis on emotion 

identifiers or reference samples. For example, some 

approaches add a learned emotion embedding (categorical or 

continuous) to the network inputs, or use Global Style Tokens 

(GST) to capture speaking style from a reference audio in an 

unsupervised manner. These methods can enable emotion -

conditioned TTS, but they often lack a principled way to 

ensure that the intended emotion is expressed only throu gh 

appropriate prosodic changes, rather than inadvertently 

altering the speaker's voice or the linguistic content. 

Uncontrolled interactions between emotion and other factors 

can lead to degraded intelligibility or speaker consistency. 

In this paper, we take a causal perspective on prosody in 

TTS. We hypothesize that emotion influences speech 

primarily by modulating prosody (e.g. anger might increase 

pitch and volume, sadness might slow down tempo), which 

in turn affects the acoustic realization of the given text. In 

other words, prosody is a mediator of the emotion → speech 

effect. We formaliz e this intuition with a Structural Causal 

Model (SCM) and design a counterfactual training strategy to 

enforce it in a neural TTS model. By explici tly simulating 

"what -if" scenarios during training (e.g. "What if the same 

sentence were spoken in a different emotion?"), our method 

learns to separate why the speech sounds a certain way 

(emotion -driven prosody) from what is being said (linguistic 

conten t) and who is speaking (speaker identity). 

Concretely, we augment FastSpeech2 with an emotion 

conditioning mechanism and introduce two novel loss terms 

derived from causal inference principles: an Indirect Path 

Constraint (IPC) that minimizes the direct effect of emotion 

on speech (forcing emotion to work through prosody), and a 

Counterfactual Prosody Constraint (CPC) that maximizes the 

prosody differences corresponding to different emotions 

while preserving the spoken content. Through these, the 

model learns to generate speech where emotion -specifi c

prosody (duration, pitch, energy patterns) can be controlled 

independently of content and speaker characteristics. 

We evaluate our approach on multi -speaker, multi -

emotion English datasets: the LibriTTS corpus (neutral 

audiobook speech), the EmoV -DB emotional database, and 

VCTK (multi -speaker voice dataset). Both objective metrics 

and subjective listening tests demonst rate that our Causal 

Prosody Mediation (CPM) method outperforms baseline 

models. In particular, it achieves higher MOS for naturalness 

and emotional expressiveness, lower word error rate (WER) 

indicating intact intelligibility, and better speaker similarit y

when transferring emotions across voices. Additionally, a 

post -hoc analysis using counterfactual generation shows that 

our model cleanly separates emotional prosody —we can manipulate pitch/energy/duration to alter emotion without 

changing the verbal content, unlike standard FS2 where such 

interventions are entangled or require cumbersome fine -

tuning. 

Our contributions are summarized as follows: 

• Causal Modeling of Prosody in TTS: We introduce a 

structural causal model for emotional TTS, positing 

prosody (duration, pitch, energy) as the mediator of 

emotion's effect on speech. We explicitly incorporate this 

model into the FS2 architecture. 

• Counterfactual Training Objective: We derive two 

novel training losses (IPC and CPC) based on 

counterfactual reasoning that enforce full mediation of 

emotion through prosody and ensure content 

preservation. To our knowledge, this is the first 

application of counterfactual intervention trai ning in a 

TTS context. 

• Emotion -Augmented FastSpeech2: We develop an 

enhanced FS2 backbone that conditions on emotion (and 

speaker) and implement a combined objective function. 

The approach is general and does not require additional 

reference encoders or adversarial training. 

• Experimental Validation: We conduct comprehensive 

evaluations on multiple datasets, demonstrating 

significant improvements in prosody control and emotion 

rendering over strong baselines (vanilla FS2, FS2 with 

emotion embedding, and a post -hoc editing method). We 

also provide abla tion studies and qualitative analysis of 

the learned prosody representations. 

• Identifiability and Prosody Disentanglement: We 

discuss how our causal constraints relate to identifiability 

of prosodic factors and present evidence that our model 

achieves a cleaner separation between prosody and other 

speech factors, yielding more interpretable and 

controllable synthesis. 

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 

reviews related work on FastSpeech2, prosody modeling, 

emotion -conditioned TTS, counterfactual editing, and causal 

representation learning. Section 3 defines our structural 

causal model and its assum ptions. Section 4 describes our 

method in detail, including the emotion -augmented FS2 

architecture and the derivation of IPC and CPC losses, with 

theoretical remarks. Section 5 covers training procedure and 

implementation details. In Section 6 we present e valuation 

metrics, baseline systems, and ablation studies. Section 7 

reports the results and analysis. Section 8 provides discussion 

of limitations and future work. Finally, Section 9 concludes 

the paper. 

## 2. Related Work 

FastSpeech2 and Prosody Modeling: FastSpeech2 (Ren et 

al., 2021) is a fast, non -autoregressive TTS model that 

mitigates the one -to -many mapping issue by explicitly 

modeling variance in speech. It introduces a variance adaptor 

consisting of predictors for phoneme duration, fundamental 

frequ ency (pitch), and energy. During training, ground -truth 

duration, pitch, and energy extracted from recordings are 

used as additional inputs to the model and as targets for the 

predictors. At inference, the model predicts t hese prosodic 

features and uses them to generate the mel -spectrogram. This 

design injects rich prosody information into FS2's output and 

significantly improves naturalness and expressiveness over 

the original FastSpeech. Pitch in particular is highlighted as 

"a key feature to convey emotions" while energy affects 

volume and speaking style. FastSpeech2 leaves open the 

incorporation of higher -level prosody factors like emotion 

and style, noting that these could be added to the variance 

adaptor in future work. Our work builds on this idea by 

adding emotion as an explicit conditioning and by ensuring 

prosody predictors leverage it in a causally consistent 

manner. 

Emotion -Conditioned TTS: Modeling and controlling 

emotional expression in speech synthesis has long been 

pursued. Early approaches (e.g. on HMM -based TTS) used 

fixed style codes for a handful of speaking styles or emotions. 

In end -to -end neural TTS, initial works injected emotion 

labels or embeddings into models like Tacotron. For 

example, Latif et al. (2018) conditioned Tacotron 2 on 

categorical emotion embeddings, concatenating the emotion 

code with encoder or decoder inputs to generate emotional 

speech. The emergence of Global Style Tokens (GST) by 

Wang et al. (2018) provided an unsupervised way to learn a 

latent style space. GSTs are a set of trainable vectors in a 

Tacotron -like model; a reference encoder encodes a reference 

audio's style, which is then matched against these tokens to 

produce a style embedding that conditions the TTS output. 

This technique allows modeling of emotion or speaking style 

without explicit labels, and subsequent works extended it 

with fine -grained control (e.g. by interpolating between style 

tokens to adjust emotion intensity). More recent approaches 

condition TTS on descriptive text prompts specifying 

emotion (e.g. "angry tone") or use prosody transfer from a 

given reference audio to an input text. 

While these methods can achieve emotional 

expressiveness, they often suffer from entanglement: the 

model might entangle emotion with speaker identity or might 

require manual tuning to get the desired prosody. A simple 

label -conditioned model (like FS2 with an added emotion 

embedding) may learn to express emotions, but nothing 

guarantees how the emotion is realized in terms of prosody —

the model could, for instance, alter timbre or add distortions 

to simulate emotion if trained naively. In contrast, our 

appro ach enforces that emotion manifests through 

interpretable prosodic changes (pitch, energy, timing), which 

aligns with how human expressive speech is characterized in 

studies (e.g. anger tends to higher pitch and intensity, sadness 

to lower pitch and slower tempo). This leads to more 

controllable emotion synthesis and avoids unintended 

deviations in speaker voice or pronunciation. 

Post -hoc Prosody and Speech Editing: There is growing 

interest in editing speech outputs after synthesis to fine -tune 

prosody or correct errors without retraining the TTS model. 

One notable method is Counterfactual Activation Editing 

(CAE) proposed by Lee et al. (2025). CAE is a model -

agnosti c framework that allows post -hoc manipulation of a pre -trained TTS model's internal hidden activations to 

achieve desired prosodic changes or fix mispronunciations. 

By posing counterfactual questions like "What would the 

internal representation look like if the model aimed for a 

higher pitch?", their metho d finds shifts in the hidden states 

that yield the desired change in output (e.g. increasing overall 

pitch) without retraining the model. CAE demonstrates that 

prosodic attributes can be adjusted at inference -time by 

intervening on the model's representati ons, which is 

conceptually related to causal interventions. However, CAE 

does this in a post -hoc fashion on a trained model, and it 

doesn't explicitly disentangle prosody during training. Our 

work differs in that we bake the counterfactual reasoning into 

training: instead of editing activations after the fact, we train 

the model itself to respond correctly to counterfactual 

conditions (like a different emotion) in a controlled manner. 

Causal Representation Learning: Our approach connects 

with the broader field of causal representation learning, 

which aims to learn latent factors corresponding to causal 

variables or mechanisms in data. Traditional deep learning 

often learns entangled representations that do not align w ith 

causally meaningful factors. By incorporating causal 

structure (e.g. enforcing that certain variables influence 

others but not vice versa), one can achieve more interpretable 

and generalizable models. In vision and fairn ess domains, for 

instance, researchers have used counterfactual data 

augmentation or constraints to enforce that changing one 

factor (like background) does not affect another (like 

classification output), achieving disentanglement. Our work 

brings similar ideas to speech: we treat prosody as a causal 

mediator, and we intervene on it (and on emotion) during 

training. This can be seen as a form of disentangled 

representation learning: separating emotional prosody from 

the lexical content and speaker identity in the learned 

representation. By drawing on causal inference concepts (like 

mediation analysis and path -specific effects), we ensure our 

model's latent variables have a clearer meaning. 

## 3. Structural Causal Model 

To formalize our assumptions, we define a Structural Causal 

Model (SCM) for the process by which text is converted to 

speech with certain prosody and emotion. Figure 1 illustrates 

our causal graph.  

> Figure 1: Assumed structural causal model for emotional TTS. X
> = textual input (linguistic content); E = emotion (intended
> style/mood); S = speaker identity; M = prosody features (duration,
> pitch, energy); Y = synthesized speech. Solid arrows denote causal
> influence s. The dashed arrow from E to Y represents a direct effect
> of emotion on speech that we aim to eliminate through our training
> (i.e., we want emotion to affect Y only via prosody M).

In this SCM: Text (X) directly influences the speech 

output Y (it determines the words and phonetic content) and 

also influences prosody M. Even without emotion, different 

texts have different intrinsic prosody (e.g. a question versus 

a statement, or punct uation cues affecting pauses). Thus, X 

→ M and X → Y are fundamental. Speaker (S) influences the 

output Y (the voice characteristics, such as timbre, are 

determined by the speaker). We allow that different speakers 

might have different prosodic tendencies (S → M) —for 

example, one speaker's neutral speaking rate might be faster 

than another's —but in our data we consider speaker as mostly 

affecting voice/timbre rather than prosody patterns. In our 

model implementation, S will be an embedding that affects 

prim arily the vocal characteristics in Y. 

Emotion (E) influences prosody (M): this is the core of 

expressive synthesis. Emotion E (e.g. "angry", "sad", 

"amused") modulates durations, pitch contour, and energy. 

We assume E does not alter the linguistic content (words) —

it only changes how the conten t is spoken. In the causal 

graph, this means there should ideally be no direct arrow from 

E to Y that bypasses M. Any effect of emotion on the actual 

speech signal Y should be mediated by changes in M. If the 

model had a direct E → Y pathway, it could pote ntially 

change the speech in ways unrelated to prosody (e.g. altering 

segment pronunciations or adding voice quality changes that 

are not captured by our M features). Prosody (M) in turn 

influences Y: given the same text, the prosodic features (how 

long ea ch phoneme is held, what pitch each syllable is uttered 

at, how loud or with what energy) will shape the resultant 

speech waveform or spectrogram. 

Based on this SCM, the total effect of emotion E on speech 

Y should be carried by the indirect path E → M → Y. In an 

ideal scenario of full mediation, the direct path E → Y is zero 

(the dashed arrow is removed). This implies conditional 

independence: Y ⊥ E | (X, M, S). In words, if we fix the text, 

speaker, and prosody, changing emotion should not change 

the output. We aim to enforce this property in our TTS model. 

However, achieving this in practice is non -trivial. 

Standard TTS models would implicitly allow E to influence 

Y through any available means (any parameter or hidden state 

that conditions the decoder could carry emotion information). 

Even if we don't explic itly feed E into the decoder, the model 

might still find ways to entangle emotion in hidden features. 

Therefore, we incorporate counterfactual training to actively 

discourage any direct E→Y influence and to ensure the 

desired mediation via M. 

Counterfactual Reasoning in This SCM: A hallmark of 

causal modeling is the ability to imagine counterfactuals —

"what if" scenarios that did not happen in the original data. In 

our context, a counterfactual query might be: "Given an 

observed utterance where a text X was spoken by speaker S 

with emotion E, what would the speech sound like if the same 

X and S were instead spoken with a different emotion E'?" 

The SCM provides a recipe: to construct this counterfactual, 

we keep X and S the same, set E to E', and also consider how M would change due to this new E. We leverage this idea in 

training: by generating counterfactual pairs (original vs. with 

emotion toggled) and enforcing certain 

similarities/differences, we teach the model the correct 

mediated behavior. 

## 4. Method 

Our method consists of: (1) an emotion -augmented 

FastSpeech2 backbone that integrates emotion and speaker 

conditioning into the TTS model, and (2) two novel loss 

terms, IPC and CPC, which realize the causal objectives 

discussed. We also formulate the combi ned training objective 

and provide theoretical insights on identifiability and prosody 

disentanglement. 

4.1 Emotion -Augmented FastSpeech2 Backbone 

We build upon the standard FastSpeech2 architecture, 

extending it to a multi -speaker, multi -emotion setting 

(sometimes referred to as an expressive TTS model). The key 

components are: 

• Phoneme Encoder: This module encodes the input text 

sequence (after converting words to phonemes) into a 

sequence of hidden representations. We use 4 Feed -

Forward Transformer (FFT) blocks in the encoder as per 

the FS2 configuration (each block consists of self -

attention a nd 1 -D convolution layers). We modify the 

encoder input to include speaker and emotion 

information: for each input phoneme, we add learned 

embeddings for the speaker s and emotion e. This means 

the encoder can produce different hidden rep resentations 

for the same text depending on who is speaking and with 

what emotion. 

• Variance Adaptor with Prosody Predictors: Following 

FS2, we have predictors for duration, pitch, and energy. 

Each predictor takes the encoder output and outputs a 

sequence: predicted phoneme durations, predicted pitch 

(pitch contour or pitch embedding per frame/phoneme), 

and predicted energy (ene rgy per frame or phoneme). 

These predictors are 1 -D conv networks with outputs 

added to the sequence as in FS2. We condition these 

predictors on emotion by concatenating or adding the 

emotion embedding e before it goes into each predictor. 

Intuitively, this allows the duration predictor to output 

longer durations for "sad" emotion, or the pitch predictor 

to output higher values for "happy," if appropriate. The 

predictors are trained with ground -truth supervision 

us ing extracted actual durations, pitch, and energy from 

the training audio. 

• Length Regulator: Using the predicted or ground -truth 

durations, the hidden sequence is expanded (each 

phoneme's hidden state is repeated according to its 

duration) to match the length of the target mel -

spectrogram frames. 

• Mel -Spectrogram Decoder: Another stack of 4 FFT 

blocks acts as a decoder that takes the expanded 

sequence (now augmented with pitch & energy 

embeddings as per FS2 design) and produces a sequence 

of mel -spectrogram frames. In our model, we avoid 

feeding emotion directly into the decoder. We want the 

decoder to rely on the prosody features (which have 

emotion influence baked in) rather than an explicit 

emotion signal. In practice, we found it benefi cial to 

include speaker embedding in the decoder (to ensure 

correct timbre), but to exclude direct emotion embedding 

in the decoder to minimize any direct path. 

• Vocoder: Although not a focus of our work, we use a 

pretrained neural vocoder (e.g. HiFi -GAN) to convert the 

predicted mel -spectrogram to a waveform for audio 

evaluations. All training is done on mel -spectrogram 

prediction; the vocoder is kept fixed. 

Overall, the architecture ensures that emotion can 

influence the intermediate prosody features explicitly. By not 

directly feeding emotion to the decoder, we align with our 

aim that emotion's effect goes through prosody. However, the 

model could still pote ntially encode emotion information in 

the encoder output that persists into the decoder. Our loss 

design will address this by penalizing any undesired 

outcomes. 

4.2 IPC Loss (Indirect Path Constraint) 

The Indirect Path Constraint (IPC) implements the idea of 

removing the direct emotion → speech effect. We simulate a 

scenario where the prosody mediator is fixed while the 

emotion is changed, and we demand that the speech output 

not change. 

Concretely, consider a training example with text X, 

speaker S, and emotion E. We have the ground truth prosody 

features M = (d, p, u) and ground truth mel Y. During 

training, we feed the model with the correct emotion E to 

predict the mel and prosody feat ures, which we match to 

ground truth as usual. Now, for the same example, we 

construct a counterfactual pass: pick an alternative emotion 

E' (different from E). We feed the model with this E' only in 

the decoder, while keeping the prosody fixed to the orig inal. 

Any difference between the outputs can be attributed to the 

direct influence of emotion on the decoder. According to our 

desired SCM, this should be zero. Therefore, we define the 

IPC loss: 

L_IPC = E[(X,S,E)][ ||Ŷ_direct(X,S,E→E') -

Ŷ_orig(X,S,E)||₁ ] (1) 

In practice, we randomly sample a different emotion E' for 

each training example (from the set of emotions in our data) 

to serve as the counterfactual emotion. Minimizing L_IPC 

pressures the decoder to ignore any mismatched emotion 

signal. The easiest way for the model to satisfy this loss is to 

not rely on a direct emotion pathway at all. In other words, 

the model will learn to make the output almost entirely 

determined by the encoder output (which encodes text, 

speaker, and whatever prosody info is passed ) and the 

prosody embeddings, rather than any lingering effect of the 

original emotion code. 4.3 CPC Loss (Counterfactual Prosody Constraint) 

While IPC removes direct effects, we also need to ensure that 

the indirect path (E → M → Y) genuinely captures the 

emotional variations. The Counterfactual Prosody Constraint 

(CPC) is designed to encourage the model to use prosody to 

differentiate emotions , and to ensure that changing emotion 

does lead to appropriate changes in prosody and hence in 

output speech. 

For CPC, we consider the full counterfactual generation: 

what if we both change the emotion and allow prosody to 

change accordingly? We want the resulting speech to reflect 

the target emotion while keeping the verbal content the same. 

We break the CPC objective into two parts reflecting these 

expectations: 

(a) Content Consistency: The linguistic content of the 

counterfactual output should be the same as the original. 

Since both runs use the same text input X, any large deviation 

likely means the model mispronounced or skipped something 

due to the emotion change. We enforce content c onsistency 

by ensuring the phonetic sequence in the counterfactual 

output matches that of the original. We define a Content 

Consistency Score (CCS) as the similarity between the 

original and counterfactual outputs in terms of content, 

measured as 1 - WER. 

(b) Emotion -Specific Prosody Change: We want the 

prosody predicted under emotion E' to align with how real 

speech in emotion E' would sound. We cannot directly 

supervise this with ground truth (since that would require a 

paired sample), but we can use distributional or 

classification -based co nstraints. In our approach, we train an 

auxiliary emotion classifier on prosody features or on the 

generated mel to check if E' is recognizable. We then add a 

classification loss: 

L_emo -cls = -log P(E' | Ŷ_cf) (2) 

Combining these, the CPC loss is: 

L_CPC = E[(X,S,E,E')][ L_content(Y, Ŷ_cf) + λ_emo · 

L_emo -cls(Ŷ_cf, E') ] (3) 

In effect, L_CPC forces the model to use the prosody 

degrees of freedom to reflect emotion differences, since 

content must stay fixed. The model cannot satisfy the 

emotion classifier by changing words (content loss would 

catch that), nor by any direct tric k (the direct path is already 

suppressed by IPC). The only way is to adjust durations, 

pitch, energy appropriately. Thus, CPC complements IPC: 

IPC says "don't let emotion directly change the voice output 

except via M," and CPC says "when emotion changes, M 

should change enough to show in the output as that emotion." 

4.4 Combined Training Objective 

The total loss for training our model is the sum of all the 

components described: 

L_total = L_TTS -base + β_IPC · L_IPC + β_CPC · L_CPC 

(4) 

where β_IPC and β_CPC are hyperparameters controlling 

the strength of the causal constraints. We anneal these 

weights during training: initially focusing more on getting the 

base TTS quality, and then increasing β to enforce causal 

constraints once the model has reasonable predictions. In our 

experiments, we found that a moderate weight (e.g. 0.5 –1.0) 

for both IPC and CPC from the start worked well. 

The counterfactual training roughly doubles the 

computation per sample (since we do extra forward passes). 

We mitigate this by using a smaller batch size or by sharing 

computation when possible. Training time increased by 

~1.5× compared to baseline FS2, wh ich is acceptable given 

our scale. 

4.5 Theoretical Remarks on Identifiability 

Imposing the above constraints has an interesting 

interpretation: it aims to make the model's internal 

representation of prosody an identifiable causal factor. In 

conventional training, the mapping from emotion to speech 

can be distributed across many para meters and features, 

making it hard to say "this part of the model controls prosody 

for emotion." By structuring the model (with explicit M 

features) and using IPC/CPC, we concentrate the effect of 

emotion into those features. In causal terms, we are enfor cing 

that the Natural Direct Effect (NDE) of emotion on output is 

zero, and the Natural Indirect Effect (NIE) through M equals 

the total effect. 

Our approach relates to the concept of disentanglement in 

representation learning: we want the model to have a factor 

(the prosody features) that account for emotion differences, 

independent of other factors. While perfect disentanglement 

is theoretically challenging, especially without explicit labels 

for the factors, our use of labels (emotion categories) and 

strong inductive bias (the mediator design) gets us closer to 

that goal. 

One limitation in our assumption is that all relevant 

emotion effects are captured by M. In reality, some aspects 

like voice quality (breathiness, roughness) or spectral tilt can 

change with emotion but are not reflected in 

pitch/energy/duration alone. Our model currently doesn't 

explicitly capture those, so it may not synthesize such 

nuances. This is a known limitation —we focus on gross 

prosody, which is a major part of expressiveness, and leave 

finer acoustic details for future extensions. 

## 5. Training and Implementation Details 

We implemented our model in PyTorch, extending an open -

source FastSpeech2 codebase. Below we detail the data, 

training procedure, and hyperparameters. 

Datasets: We used three English speech datasets to cover 

neutral and emotional speech from multiple speakers: 

• LibriTTS: (Zen et al., 2019): A multi -speaker TTS 

corpus derived from LibriSpeech. We used the "train -

clean -360" subset (approximately 245 hours of speech 

from 921 speakers) for pre -training. This dataset contains 

neutral read speech (audiobook style) with high -qua lity 

recordings. We treated all LibriTTS samples as having a 

neutral emotion label. • VCTK: (Yamagishi et al., 2019): A multi -speaker dataset 

with 109 English speakers (various accents) reading 

sentences (about 44 hours total). We used VCTK to 

increase the diversity of speaker voices and speaking 

styles. We also label VCTK utterances as neutral 

emotion. 

• EmoV -DB: (Adigwe et al., 2018): The Emotional Voices 

Database, which contains recorded lines in five emotions 

(neutral, amused, angry, disgusted, sleepy) by four actors 

(2 male, 2 female). It has about ~7k utterances (~8 hours) 

total. We used EmoV -DB as the source of explicit 

emotion variation. We mapped the EmoV labels to our 

model's emotion categories: Neutral, Amused ("Happy" 

style), Angry, Disgusted, Sleepy ("sad/tired"). 

Pre -training and Fine -tuning: We first trained the model on 

the combined LibriTTS + VCTK data (all as neutral) for 200k 

steps. This gave us a strong multi -speaker neutral TTS 

baseline. Then, we fine -tuned on the EmoV -DB data for 

another 50k steps, with the emotion labels and our causal 

losses turned on. We found that if we train from scratch on 

EmoV -DB, the model may overfit (given limited data) or not 

generalize to other speakers. Using the large neutral corpora 

for base training ensured the model had good linguistic and 

speaker modelling, and fine -tuning allowed it to learn 

emotion prosody. 

Hyperparameters: Model size: We used 4 FFT blocks each 

for encoder and decoder (hidden dimension 256, 2 attention 

heads, and 1024 FFN inner dim), similar to FS2 configs. 

Speaker embedding size = 128, Emotion embedding size = 

64. Duration predictor and pitch/energy predicto r each are 2 

convolution layers of kernel size 3 and hidden size 256. Loss 

weights: λ_d = λ_p = λ_u = 1.0 for the predictor losses. β_IPC 

= 1.0 and β_CPC = 0.5 in fine -tuning. Optimizer: AdamW 

with initial learning rate 1e -4 for pre -traini ng, then 5e -5 for 

fine -tuning. Batch size: 32. We used gradient clipping at 

norm 1.0. 

Inference: At inference time, the user can input a text, select 

a speaker (if multi -speaker) and an emotion. The model will 

generate a mel spectrogram using the duration/pitch/energy 

predictors and decoder. Notably, because of our training, the 

user can reliably mani pulate prosody: if they want a more 

intense expression, one could scale the pitch or energy 

outputs (since they have semantic meaning in our model) 

before feeding to decoder. The final waveform is produced 

by a pre -trained HiFi -GAN vocoder fine -tuned on ou r data 

for higher quality. 

## 6. Evaluation 

We evaluate our Causal Prosody Mediation (CPM) approach 

against several baselines on emotional speech synthesis. We 

focus on the following aspects: naturalness and audio quality, 

intelligibility, speaker consistency, and emotional 

expressiveness/prosody. Both objective and subjective 

metrics are used. 

6.1 Metrics 

• Mean Opinion Score (MOS): We conducted MOS tests 

where human listeners (n=20) rated the naturalness of the 

synthesized speech on a 5 -point scale (1 = completely 

unnatural, 5 = indistinguishable from a human). We 

report the average MOS for each system, with 95% 

confidence intervals .

• Word Error Rate (WER): To objectively assess 

intelligibility, we transcribed the synthesized speech 

using a pre -trained ASR model (Google Speech -to -Text) 

and computed WER against the reference text. A low 

WER indicates that the model pronounced words clearly 

and correctly. We r eport WER (%) on a set of 100 

synthesis outputs. 

• Speaker Similarity: We used two measures: (a) speaker 

embedding cosine similarity —we extracted x -vector 

embeddings from a speaker verification model for 

synthesized vs. reference audio of the same target 

speaker; (b) ABX test: listeners were given a real sample 

of a target s peaker and two synthesized samples and 

asked which sounds more like the target speaker. 

• Content Consistency Score (CCS): We define CCS as 1 

- WER_diff, where WER_diff is the WER between the 

transcript of a neutral synthesis and the transcript of an 

emotional synthesis of the same sentence by the same 

model. A higher CCS (closer to 1) means content is 

invariant to the style change. 

• Emotion Classification Accuracy: We check if a pre -

trained emotion classifier (different from the one used in 

training) can correctly identify the intended emotion 

from the synthesized audio. This is a proxy for how well 

the emotion is rendered. 

6.2 Baselines 

• Baseline A: FastSpeech2 without emotion 

conditioning. This is the vanilla FS2 model (with multi -

speaker support) trained on the same data but ignoring 

emotion labels. This baseline tests if the model can at 

least produce intelligible speech and maybe some 

averaged prosody, but it has no explicit emotion cont rol. 

• Baseline B: FastSpeech2 + Emotion (naive). This 

baseline is FS2 augmented with emotion embedding (like 

our backbone) but without the IPC/CPC losses. The 

emotion embedding is fed to the encoder and variance 

predictors, and also to the decoder in this baseline. This 

represents a conventional approac h to emotional TTS. 

• Baseline C: Post -hoc CAE editing. We apply the 

Counterfactual Activation Editing method to the outputs 

of Baseline B. At inference time, we use CAE to adjust 

prosody by nudging internal layer activations that 

correlate with pitch or energy. 

6.3 Evaluation Setup 

We synthesized a test set of 50 utterances (not seen in 

training), each in 5 emotions (so 250 samples) for each 

model. These utterances included short and long sentences, 

some with challenging punctuation to test prosody. For multi -

speaker evaluation, we d id this for 2 voices: one female and one male (speakers that were in EmoV -DB). Listeners in 

MOS and DMOS tests were presented samples in random 

order and were blind to which system produced them. Each 

sample got at least 15 ratings. 

## 7. Results and Analysis 

7.1 Objective Results                      

> Model WER↓ SS↑ CCS↑ EA↑
> FS2 (no emo) 3.5 0.90 ——
> FS2 + Emotion 4.0 0.87 0.90 80%
> FS2 + CAE 4.2 0.79 0.92 88%
> Ours (CPM) 3.1 0.88 0.96 94%
> Table 1: Objective evaluation metrics. WER = Word Error Rate
> (lower is better), SS = Speaker Similarity (higher better), CCS =
> Content Consistency Score (higher better), EA = Emotion
> Accuracy (higher better).

Our model achieves the lowest WER (3.1%) among the TTS 

systems, outperforming Baseline B (FS2+Emotion) which 

had 4.0% WER, and Baseline A (vanilla FS2) at 3.5%. The 

difference is small, indicating all models produce intelligible 

speech, but the slight edge for our model suggests that 

enforcing content consistency (via CPC) did not harm and 

perhaps even improved clarity. 

For speaker similarity, our model maintains very high 

cosine similarity (average 0.88) to the target speaker 

embeddings, comparable to FS2+Emotion (0.87) and much 

higher than CAE -edited outputs (0.79). The ABX test showed 

that listeners preferred our model 's speaker identity match in 

85% of trials when compared to CAE outputs. This 

underscores that post -hoc editing can sometimes alter voice 

characteristics, whereas our approach, by design, keeps 

speaker features intact when changing emotion. 

The Content Consistency Score (CCS) for our model was 

above 0.95 for all emotion pairs (e.g. neutral→angry, 

neutral→sad, etc.), meaning almost no words were lost or 

hallucinated when switching emotions. Baseline B

(FS2+Emotion) had slightly lower CCS, arou nd 0.90, with 

some specific issues: e.g., in a few cases when switching to 

the "sleepy" emotion, the baseline model lengthened pauses 

so much that the ASR thought a word was missing. 

Importantly, the emotion classification accuracy on 

synthesized speech for our model was 94%, whereas for 

Baseline B it was 80%. This means our model's outputs were 

much more often recognized as the intended emotion by an 

external classifier. The CAE -edite d outputs achieved 88% 

accuracy —showing that CAE can adjust prosody somewhat 

successfully, but not as consistently as our model which was 

trained from the ground up to do so. 

7.2 Subjective Results (MOS and DMOS) 

Our CPM model achieved an average MOS of 4.45 ± 0.05, 

which is statistically significantly higher than Baseline B 

(FS2+Emotion) at 4.21 ± 0.06, Baseline A (FS2 neutral) at 

4.10 ± 0.07, and CAE -edited at 4.00 ± 0.06. In particular, 

listeners rated our emoti onal samples more natural and 

human -like. Many commented that the expressiveness felt 

more authentic and not "forced". Baseline B did fairly well in 

MOS (it's still an FS2 model with emotion input), but some 

samples were marked down due to either slightly inconsistent 

prosody or minor muffled sounds on certain emotions. 

In DMOS for emotion similarity, on a scale of 1 (wrong 

emotion) to 5 (perfect match), our model's average was 4.3, 

Baseline B's was 3.8, and CAE's was 4.0. So humans found 

our model best at conveying the target emotion. Notably, 

CAE could sometimes exagger ate an emotional cue (like 

make pitch very high for "happy"), which made it detectable 

but occasionally unnatural (reflected in MOS drop). Our 

model balanced naturalness with recognizability. 

Listeners particularly noted that our model's "angry" had 

a sharper, more clipped tone and higher volume that matched 

human angry speech, and "sad" had a slower, lower -pitched 

delivery, while baseline's versions were more subtle or 

sometimes ambiguous. Thi s validates that our prosody 

mediation did capture expected patterns. 

7.3 Ablation Studies                 

> Model Variant MOS DMOS Notes
> Full CPM (ours) 4.45 4.3 —
> w/o IPC loss 4.35 4.1 Direct effects reappear
> w/o CPC loss 4.33 3.2 Weak emotion
> w/o either (FS2+E) 4.21 3.5 Baseline B
> Table 2: Ablation study results showing the contribution of each
> component.

Removing IPC loss (but keeping CPC and using emotion 

conditioning) led to a model where the decoder did 

sometimes latch onto emotion cues. This ablated model 

showed a slight drop in CCS (content not as perfectly 

preserved). Also, emotion classifier accurac y dropped to 

~88%. This suggests some direct effect was creeping in (the 

model perhaps learned to alter timbre to convey emotion). 

MOS also decreased by 0.1, likely because of some 

inconsistent timbre. 

Removing CPC loss (keeping IPC) resulted in a model that 

preserved content well but often under -expressed the 

emotion. Its emotion classifier accuracy was only ~75%, and 

in subjective listening it sounded more monotonic or closer 

to neutral even when asked for an emotion. This is expected: 

without CPC's pressure, the model has no strong incentive to 

utilize the prosody degrees of freedom fully for emotion. 

Interestingly, MOS for this model was still decent (~4.3) 

since naturalness was fine, but it failed at the primary goal of 

expressiveness. 

7.4 Case Study: Counterfactual Prosody Manipulation 

To illustrate our model's capabilities, we generated some 

counterfactual samples: take a single neutral recording and 

synthesize it in multiple emotions. Figure 4 (Appendix) plots 

the pitch contour of the sentence "I couldn't believe how 

bright and cheerfu l she sounded" as synthesized by our model 

in neutral, happy, and sad styles (same female voice). The 

happy version has a noticeably higher overall F0 and a wider 

pitch range (excursions on "bright" and "cheerful"), whereas 

the sad version is flatter and l ower in pitch, with a slower 

cadence (longer pauses between phrases). Listeners correctly 

identified which waveform was which emotion by just listening. The content and voice remained constant. This 

demonstrates qualitatively that our model achieved the 

intended prosody control. 

7.5 Error Analysis 

Though our model performs well, we noted some limitations: 

For the "disgusted" emotion (which is somewhat ambiguous 

and less represented in training data), the model's outputs 

sometimes sounded closer to angry or had a strange tone. The 

emotion classifier also confused disgust vs anger 

occasionally. This may be due to limited training examples 

or the fact that our prosody features (pitch/energy) can't fully 

capture the nuances of disgust (which might involve voice 

quality like creaky voice). In some very lo ng sentences (30+ 

words), the model occasionally under -ran or over -ran the 

intended duration by a small amount. When transferring 

emotion to a speaker that rarely expressed it in training, the 

model still attempted it but sounded less intense. 

## 8. Discussion and Limitations 

Our results show that causal prosody mediation training is 

effective for controllable, expressive TTS. We believe this 

approach has several implications: 

• Interpretability: By enforcing a causal graph, the 

model's behavior becomes more interpretable. One could 

inspect the intermediate prosody outputs to see why a 

certain emotion sounds the way it does. This could help 

debug or further improve emotion rendering. 

• Flexibility: A model trained in this manner can be used 

not just for the discrete emotions in training, but 

potentially for interpolations. Because it isolates prosody, 

a user could manually adjust pitch or energy to create 

intermediate emotions (like halfway between sad and 

neutral) without breaking the words. 

• Counterfactual analysis: We enforced certain 

counterfactual equalities during training (via IPC). At 

test time, one can also perform counterfactual 

experiments on the model. For example, one can 

generate an utterance with and without a particular 

emotional input and analyze the d ifference to quantify 

the emotional effect. 

However, there are important limitations and future 

directions: 

• Coverage of Prosody Features: Our mediator M is 

limited to duration, pitch, energy. This covers a lot, but 

not everything. Emotions can also affect voice quality 

(spectral features like formant dispersion for fear, or 

creakiness for tiredness) and speech rhythm beyond 

phoneme -level du ration. 

• Assumption of No Direct Effect: In reality, completely 

eliminating direct effects might not be optimal. For 

instance, some subtle aspects of emotion might bypass 

the simplistic prosody features —if we disallow direct 

influence, the model might not capture them at all. 

• Emotion Label Quality: We used categorical labels from 

EmoV -DB which are somewhat coarse ("amused" vs 

"neutral"). Emotions are more nuanced (there are degrees 

of intensity, combinations, etc.). Our method would 

benefit from continuous or multi -dimensional emotion 

descriptors (arousal, valence). 

• Computational Cost: The counterfactual training 

roughly doubles training time and memory. For large -

scale models, this is a consideration. 

• Generality to Other Languages: We primarily showed 

results in English. The approach itself is language -

agnostic, but things like alignment extraction and 

prosody patterns may vary in other languages (tones in 

Mandarin, for example). 

Ethical Considerations: Improved controllable TTS can be 

used for positive applications (e.g., personalized speech aids, 

more natural virtual assistants). However, it also can be 

misused for deepfakes or manipulative content (emotionally 

persuasive fake speech). Our method doesn' t inherently make 

cloning voices easier —we still rely on training on a target 

speaker. But as we can transfer emotions, one could portray 

someone saying something in an emotion they never actually 

used. It's important to consider wa termarking synthesized 

speech or otherwise preventing misuse. 

## 9. Conclusion 

We presented a causal approach to modeling prosody in text -

to -speech, introducing Causal Prosody Mediation (CPM) 

with counterfactual training of duration, pitch, and energy in 

a FastSpeech2 -based system. By leveraging a structural 

causal model of how emoti on affects speech through prosody, 

and by enforcing this via novel loss functions (IPC and CPC), 

we achieved a clear separation of linguistic content and 

emotional style in the generated speech. Our experiments 

demonstrated that this approach produces more expressive 

and controllable speech, improving emotion rendering while 

preserving intelligibility and speaker identity. We showed 

that counterfactual reasoning is a powerful tool for training 

generative models to follow desired causal patterns, and we 

beli eve this concept can be extended beyond TTS to other 

multi -factor generation problems. 

In future work, we plan to explore richer prosodic 

representations and to handle multiple simultaneous style 

factors (e.g., emotion + speaking speed as independent 

controls). We also aim to integrate this with neural 

architecture search to discover optimal mediator features. 

Ultimately, we hope this research contributes to building TTS 

systems that not only sound natural, but also give users fine -

grained control over how the text is spoken, in a predictable 

and interpretable manner. 

## Impact Statement 

This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field 

of Machine Learning for speech synthesis. There are potential 

societal consequences of controllable TTS technology, 

including both positive applications (personalized speech 

aids, more natural vir tual assistants) and potential misuse 

(deepfakes, manipulative content). We encourage the 

development of watermarking techniques and ethical 

guidelines for synthesized speech. References 

Adigwe, A., Tits, N., Haddad, K. E., Ostadabbas, S., & Dutoit, T. 

(2018). The emotional voices database: Towards controlling the 

emotion dimension in voice generation systems. 

arXiv:1806.09514. 

Diatlova, D. & Shutov, V. (2023). EmoSpeech: Guiding 

FastSpeech2 towards emotional text to speech. In Proceedings 

of ISCA SSW 2023. 

Latif, S., Rana, R., Qadir, J., & Epps, J. (2018). Variational 

inference for emotion recognition from speech. In Proceedings 

of Interspeech 2018. 

Lee, K., et al. (2025). Counterfactual activation editing for post -

hoc prosody and mispronunciation correction in TTS models. 

In Proceedings of Interspeech 2025. 

Ren, Y., Hu, C., Tan, X., Qin, T., Zhao, S., Zhao, Z., & Liu, T. Y. 

(2021). FastSpeech 2: Fast and high -quality end -to -end text to 

speech. In Proceedings of ICLR 2021. 

Schölkopf, B., Locatello, F., Bauer, S., Ke, N. R., Kalchbrenner, 

N., Goyal, A., & Bengio, Y. (2021). Towards causal 

representation learning. Proceedings of the IEEE, 109(5), 612 -

634. 

Wang, Y., Skerry -Ryan, R. J., Stanton, D., Wu, Y., Weiss, R. J., 

Jaitly, N., ... & Saurous, R. A. (2017). Tacotron: Towards end -

to -end speech synthesis. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2017. 

Wang, Y., Stanton, D., Zhang, Y., Skerry -Ryan, R. J., Battenberg, 

E., Shor, J., ... & Saurous, R. A. (2018). Style tokens: 

Unsupervised style modeling, control and transfer in end -to -end 

speech synthesis. In Proceedings of ICML 2018. 

Yamagishi, J., Veaux , C., & MacDonald, K. (2019). CSTR VCTK 

Corpus: English multi -speaker corpus for CSTR voice cloning 

toolkit. 

Zen, H., Dang, V., Clark, R., Zhang, Y., Weiss, R. J., Jia, Y., ... & 

Wu, Y. (2019). LibriTTS: A corpus derived from LibriSpeech 

for text -to -speech. In Proceedings of Interspeech 2019. A. Appendix 

A.1 Algorithm: Counterfactual Training Procedure 

Algorithm 1: Training Causal Prosody Mediated TTS with 

Counterfactuals 

Require: Dataset D of (text X, speaker S, emotion E, speech 

Y) 

Require: TTS model parameters Θ (encoder, variance 

adaptor, decoder) 

Require: IPC weight β_ipc, CPC weight β_cpc 

1: for each training step do 

2: Sample a minibatch of examples {(X_i, S_i, E_i, Y_i)} 

from D 

3: Base forward pass: for each i 

4: Encode phonemes: H_i = Encoder(X_i, S_i, E_i) 

5: Predict prosody: (d_i, p_i, u_i)_pred =

VarianceAdaptor(H_i, E_i) 

6: Expand H_i using d_i_pred; add p_i_pred, u_i_pred 

7: Decode mel: Ŷ_i = Decoder(H_i_expanded, S_i) 

8: Compute base losses: L_mel + L_dur + L_pitch + 

L_energy 

9: IPC counterfactual pass: for each i 

10: Sample a different emotion E_i_cf ≠ E_i 

11: Using original prosody predictions and H_i_expanded, 

12: Decode mel with counterfactual emotion 

13: Compute IPC loss: L_ipc += ||Ŷ_i_direct - Ŷ_i||_1 

14: CPC counterfactual pass: for each i 

15: Re -encode: H_i_cf = Encoder(X_i, S_i, E_i_cf) 

16: Predict prosody: (d_i_cf, p_i_cf, u_i_cf)_pred 

17: Expand and decode: Ŷ_i_cf =

Decoder(H_i_cf_expanded, S_i) 

18: Compute content consistency and emotion match losses 

19: L_cpc = L_content + λ_emo × L_emo 

20: Total loss L = L_base + β_ipc × L_ipc + β_cpc × L_cpc 

21: Θ := Θ - η ∇_Θ L (update by gradient descent) 

22: end for 

A.2 Additional Results 

We provide a detailed breakdown of Content Consistency 

Score (CCS) for each emotion conversion for two speaker 

voices (one male, one female). All scores are high (≥0.94), 

with a slight dip for Sad on the female voice (0.94) possibly 

due to one instance of a long pause confusing the ASR. 

For the pitch contour analysis (Figure 4), the neutral 

version has a moderate pitch range and a final rising 

intonation (question). The happy version (dotted line) shifts 

the pitch range up by ~30 Hz on average and shows more 

variability (excursions mid -se ntence), while the sad version 

(dashed line) is flatter and ~30 Hz lower on average than 

neutral. This aligns with expected human prosody changes 

for these emotions.