Title: ZORO: Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15625v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Apr 2026 00:24:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding 

# Jenny Ma, Sitong Wang, Joshua H. Kung, Lydia B. Chilton 

Columbia University New York, New York, USA 

{jenny.ma, sitong, chilton}@cs.columbia.edu , jhk2214@columbia.edu 

Figure 1: Zoro makes rules active by instantiating a framework called Enrich-Enforce-Evolve to push rules to the forefront of vibe coding. When a user vibe codes with an agent, the agent first generates an initial plan. This initial plan is enriched with rules . As the plan is being executed, the agent must enforce the rules by proving each rule was followed. Finally, the user can give feedback for each rule application and evolve the ruleset to become more specific and refined over time. 

## Abstract 

Rules files (e.g., AGENTS.md , CLAUDE.md ) are the primary mecha-nism for human-agent alignment when developers vibe code. How-ever, they remain passive: it is not immediately apparent when rules are being used or followed, or how to improve them. To transform rules from passive text into active controls, we introduce Zoro , an interactive interface that integrates directly with a coding agent and anchors rules to every step of the coding process. After an agent generates an initial plan, Zoro enriches the plan with rules, enforces the rules during implementation by requiring the agent prove that each rule was followed, and allows users to provide in-situ feed-back when they are unsatisfied with a rule application to evolve the ruleset . A technical evaluation shows that coding agents follow rules more with Zoro than without. A user study demonstrates a change in people’s behavior and cognitive strategies when rules are at the forefront of vibe coding. We discuss how making rules active in agentic systems unlocks broader opportunities for human-agent alignment in coding settings and beyond. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Human-centered computing → User interface program-ming . 

> Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
> Conference’17, Washington, DC, USA
> ©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn

## Keywords 

vibe coding, rules, AGENTS.md, agents, llm 

ACM Reference Format: 

Jenny Ma, Sitong Wang, Joshua H. Kung, Lydia B. Chilton. 2026. Zoro :Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding. In . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn 

## 1 Introduction 

Developers no longer have to write code line-by-line. Instead, they steer agents through iterative prompting, a process known as vibe coding [ 16 , 20 ]. But prompting is unreliable; agents often ignore instructions, and developers are left repeating themselves session after session. Rules files (e.g., AGENTS.md [1 ], CLAUDE.md [ 3] or .md 

files in custom rule directories [ 8]) address this by encoding per-sistent intent ("always use brand colors in the UI", "never access database directly from frontend", etc.) – giving developers a way to embed coding conventions, architectural constraints, and workflow preferences directly into their projects. Widely adopted across ma-jor industry tools [ 4 , 10 , 14 , 33 ], they have emerged as the primary mechanism for human-agent alignment in vibe coding, letting de-velopers personalize and guide agent behavior without needing to micromanage every step. Despite the importance and ubiquity of rules, rules files remain as passive text. Rules are loaded once at the start of a coding session then gradually lose relevance, so their influence deterio-rates throughout the session[ 4 , 14 , 22 , 27 ]. Additionally, developers lack visibility into whether agents actually follow instructions at all [ 11 , 39 ]. Finally, because developers tend to append rules reac-tively rather than regularly audit them, rulesets can accumulate contradictions and context-specific decisions that are no longer  

> arXiv:2604.15625v1 [cs.HC] 17 Apr 2026 Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al.

relevant [ 39 ]. Thus, developers remain in a defensive role – con-stantly monitoring outputs, correcting mistakes, and reasserting rules that were already written down [ 6, 41 ]. Given the importance of rules, how can we surface them so that they become a focal lever — something developers can actively see, engage with, and rely on? We propose transforming rules from passive text into active controls that users can interact with. Based on findings from our developer study, we introduce a framework called Enrich-Enforce-Evolve to push rules to the forefront of the developer’s attention (see Figure 1). The first principle is to enrich the plan: after a coding agent generates an initial implementation plan, relevant rules are fetched to rewrite the plan in order to anchor each step of the plan to rules. As the agent executes the plan, rules are enforced : the agent must follow each rule associated with the current step by providing code evidence and unit tests. Developers can review this evidence and add in-situ notes where rules fall short of their standards. Finally, the rules evolve . At the end of the session, the developer’s in-situ notes, each anchored to a concrete example of a rule application, are aggregated and used to sharpen specified rules and capture preferences that emerged in practice. Rather than treating rules as static configuration, Enrich-Enforce-Evolve is a deliberate strategy to make rules visible, interactive, and continuously evolving. We introduce Zoro , a plugin layered on top of existing coding agents that instantiates Enrich-Enforce-Evolve and anchors rules to every phase of the vibe coding process. While Enrich-Enforce-Evolve applies broadly to AI-augmented software development, we focus on vibe coding—where developers steer agents entirely through natural language rather than writing code directly—as it represents a rapidly growing practice with a large user base and a well-constrained starting point [ 16 , 20 ]. In Zoro , developers see which rules apply at each step, watch them get enforced in real time, and refine them based on what they observe. Users interact with Zoro via a front-end interface to create, modify, and review rules, while simultaneously directing their coding agent to write code. A technical evaluation demonstrates that Zoro increases rule following by 57% compared to standard vibe coding. Our user study reveals that surfacing rules as active controls changes how developers approach vibe coding; specifically we notice a shift from prompt engineering to rule engineering as a method of controlling agents. We conclude with a discussion on how making rules ac-tive unlocks broader opportunities for human-agent alignment in coding settings and beyond. Our contributions are as follows: 

• Zoro : A system that implements Enrich-Enforce-Evolve , a pattern for rule interaction that transforms passive rules into active controls in the coding process. 

• Technical Evaluation : A controlled evaluation of 36 vibe coding sessions demonstrating that Zoro improves rule fol-lowing by 57% while maintaining feature-completion abili-ties of a standard coding agent. 

• User Study : A qualitative study (N=12) examining how vibe coding is transformed when rules are made active. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Lack of Transparency in Vibe Coding 

While AI coding tools are powerful and widely valued, prior work has found that developers frequently reject generated code because it fails to meet user’s requirements and is difficult to steer [ 25 ]. Pro-grammers must actively ground, inspect, and repair AI-generated code within its context to ensure alignment with their intent [ 6], and this challenge intensifies during iterative exploration [ 45 ] or when working with complex codebases [44]. Beyond general usability concerns, recent work frames trust and validation as first-order challenges in AI-assisted programming. Wang et al. show that developers struggle to form appropriate trust in AI-powered code generation, especially around expectation-setting, configuration, and suggestion validation [ 41 ]. Ferdowsi et al. find that runtime validation of AI-generated code fails because execution-based inspection is too disruptive, and show that con-tinuously surfacing runtime values during editing reduces this problem [ 13 ]. Together, this work suggests that reliable AI-assisted programming depends not only on better generation, but on in-terfaces that help developers inspect and verify behavior. Zoro 

addresses this gap by explicitly surfacing developer rules, enabling users to specify, verify, and refine them in context. 

## 2.2 Context Engineering and Workflow Alignment 

Recent work has improved alignment by helping AI systems build better context over the course of interaction. Most of this work focuses on two capabilities: enriching context with more relevant user information, and evolving that context as user intent changes. For example, prior systems infer preferences from interaction histo-ries [ 37 ], curate personal context for planning [ 46 ], and iteratively revise specifications or principles through in-situ notes and feed-back [ 35 , 38 , 40 ]. These approaches make system context richer and more adaptive, but they stop short of ensuring that the resulting context is actually followed and enforced during execution. This gap is especially important in workflow-based settings, where alignment must persist throughout a multi-step process rather than appear only in an initial prompt or plan. In coding agents like Cline [ 9], existing enforcement is typically ad hoc rather than systematically integrated into the workflow itself. Recent sys-tems have started treating alignment as something that must be maintained across planning and execution, with work such as Plan-Then-Execute [ 17 ] and Cocoa [ 12 ] exposing how intentions can drift once execution begins. Other systems further suggest that alignment benefits when agents create structured moments for oversight during execution [ 7, 11 , 19 , 29 , 34 , 36 ]. For instance, Need Help? surfaces proactive assistance before users explicitly ask for it [ 7 ], while Morae pauses UI agents at decision points so users can intervene on meaningful choices [ 34 ]. We build on this line of work by treating developer rules as process-level alignment constraints: rules are not just context to read, but checkpoints that are actively 

enforced and updated throughout execution. 

## 2.3 Anchoring Rules in Execution 

Developers increasingly externalize intent into rule artifacts such as 

AGENTS.md files and agent scaffolding specifications (e.g., harness engineering [ 28 ]), yet these rules remain disconnected from execu-tion. When served as static context, they do not reliably improve task success and can increase exploration cost [ 15 ], largely due to context rot[ 22 , 27 ]. Prior work on grounding suggests that intent Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

must be anchored to agent actions at each step. Existing system build on this; DynEx grounds high-level intent into structured in-termediate designs [ 30 ]. Another study shows users benefit from visible intermediate assumptions and step-level verification [21]. A broader line of systems similarly ties model behavior to con-crete evidence at the point of action. Within programming, Ivie anchors lightweight explanations directly to just-generated code so developers can interpret outputs in relation to the code itself [ 42 ], and Trailblazer answers developer questions with annotated, re-playable agent-discovered program traces [ 43 ]. CodeA11y connects accessibility intent to concrete coding actions by pairing genera-tion with accessibility-focused guidance in context [ 31 ]. Beyond programming, InkSync ties model-suggested edits to executable document operations [ 23 ], while HaLLMark grounds AI writing as-sistance in interaction history, exposing where model contributions came from and how they entered the workflow [ 18 ]. Collectively, this work suggests that human-AI systems are more usable when model behavior is tied to concrete intermediate evidence [ 19 , 26 ]. Our work builds on this by transforming rules from passive text into active objects anchored to execution steps, enforced during action, and refined based on grounded evidence. 

## 3 Design Goals 

To better understand the challenges developers face when vibe coding with rules, we conducted semi-structured interviews with 10 programmers (5-10 years of coding experience) who regularly vibe code with rules files. Additionally, we observed three programmers vibe code with their own rules. Each session lasting 2-3 hours. From these conversations and sessions, we found that developers largely appreciate rules files and believe they improve agent perfor-mance. Participants generally knew what rules they wanted; they either had rules files written from personal experience or adapted from templates shared online. P3 noted: “[Rules files] definitely work. . . still not perfect. . .[but] the better context you give AI, the better it’s going to perform.” However, there is little visibility into how effective individual rules actually are (Challenge 1 -Rule Invisibility) . Developers largely rely on a general sense that having rules helps, rather than understanding which rules work and why. As P3 said, “it’s difficult to know when you have a good [rule] versus a bad [rule], it’s very hard to find the balance.” 

Participants also reported issues of rules not being fol-lowed (Challenge 2 - Skipping Rules) . Particularly, there is the prob-lem of context rot – rules are loaded initially but not continuously retrieved – leading agents to gradually stop following them. P3 de-scribed his personal experience: “a very common rule it messes up is not using the ORM (Object-Relational Mapping). Even though it is specified in multiple places [in the rules file], it still tries to make a direct database call.” Developers also admitted to not properly maintaining their rules files and just adding to it without refining existing rules, resulting in increasingly messy and inconsistent rulesets (Challenge 3 - Ruleset Decay) . P1 noted that when “[the AGENTS.md ] just becomes too bloated. . . [the agent starts] applying things where it shouldn’t.” We outline four key design goals (DGs) based on the above challenges. Since developers already have rules, our design goals focus not on rule creation, but on making existing rules active, visible, and enforceable throughout the vibe coding workflow: 

• DG1: Make Relevant Rules Explicit. Plans are generated without explicit references to rules, and developers have little visibility into which rules are applied or how they influence execution. As a result, it is difficult to assess whether rules are effective or even followed at all. Systems should therefore surface relevant rules and integrate them directly with the plan and make their influence visible. 

• DG2: Guarantee and Prove that Rules are Followed. De-velopers need confidence that important rules are actually followed. Systems should enforce rules during code imple-mentation and prevent progress when rules are violated. They should provide also evidence linking rules to specific code, allowing developers to check whether the rule had the intended effect. 

• DG3: Enable Iterative Refinement. Rules are rarely main-tained, largely because developers lack a clear way to evalu-ate their effectiveness. Instead of “hoping for the best,” de-velopers should be able to detect when rules fail and imme-diately refine them. 

## 4 Zoro 

Based on our design goals, we present Zoro , a system that aug-ments vibe coding workflows by making rules an active part of the development process. Zoro plugs into whatever agent the user already relies on (Codex [ 32 ], Claude Code [ 2], Cline [ 9], or Cursor [ 5]) and anchors rules to every step of the coding process. Rather than rules sitting passively in a markdown file hoping to be no-ticed, Zoro surfaces them as living, visible objects: users see which rules apply at each step, see them get enforced in real time, and refine them based on what they observe. Users interact with Zoro 

via a front-end interface to create, modify, and review rules, while simultaneously directing their coding agent to write code. At the heart of Zoro is the Enrich-Enforce-Evolve framework (see Figure 2), which maps directly onto phases of vibe coding (planning, code implementation, and review): 

• Enrich the Plan . When the coding agent generates a plan, 

Zoro reshapes the plan so that each step is anchored in rules, and each step explicitly cites relevant rules (DG1) .

• Enforce the Rules . As the agent writes code to execute the plan, Zoro constrains the agent’s actions so that it must pro-vide proof for each rule before it can move on to the next step. Requiring agents to cite evidence is a well-established tech-nique for ensuring rules are followed rather than assumed [24] (DG2) .

• Evolve the Ruleset . Users can review enforcement evidence on Zoro ’s interface to confirm their rules were followed and add in-situ notes if they dislike how a rule was applied. Users don’t know how to refine rules because they have no grounded basis for doing so; Zoro closes this gap and ensures that rule improvements are anchored in examples. In-situ notes are aggregated and fed to an LLM to evolve the rules and close the "rule-loop". 

Zoro has two entry points into the developer’s workflow, shown in Figure 3. The first is a visual interface, The second is zoro-cli ,Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al. 

Figure 2: Enrich-Enforce-Evolve is a framework for making rules active. In Enrich , multiple rules, including Rule 7 , are retrieved and used to reshape the plan (i.e. add sub steps to Step 1 ) before the agent executes the plan. In the figure, we illustrate the agent executing Step 1b . The agent must both generate code and prove that Rule 7 is being followed through code evidence and unit tests. A user adds in-situ notes to Rule 7 ’s rule application. After the full plan is executed, during evolve , we aggregate all 

in-situ notes to refine and further specify the rules so that they are grounded in real examples. 

a Python package installed at the repository root that plugs Zoro 

directly into the coding agent’s environment — the user continues vibe coding as normal, while Zoro reads what the agent produces. 

zoro-cli ensures the coding agent enforces each rule, and surfaces everything for the user to verify. To make this possible, zoro-cli installs two things in the project repository. The first is an instruction file called ZORO.md that tells the agent it must call zoro update-step to mark progress and 

zoro prove-rule to submit evidence for each rule before it can advance to the next step. The second is a shared directory, .zoro ,that acts as the communication channel between the agent and 

Zoro . Zoro writes the enriched plan there, the agent reads it and writes back its progress and evidence, and the user’s in-situ notes are written there too. Because all communication flows through this directory, Zoro is fully agent-agnostic: any coding agent that can read files and run CLI commands can integrate with the system. Additional package, and framework details are in Appendix A.1. In this section, we provide a usage scenario to walk through 

Zoro ’s interface and key implementation details. Consider Johnny, an engineer at a mid-sized company building Logpose , an internal tool for HR teams to log employee sentiment and surface patterns across the organization. Because Logpose handles sensitive em-ployee data, Johnny must maintain strict API boundaries, careful schema migrations, and a coherent design system. He already uses Codex to vibe code, and over time has built up an AGENTS.md file with rules like always enforce API boundaries so the frontend never reaches directly into backend logic, reuse shared UI components instead of importing from external libraries, avoid ad hoc state management, and always backfill existing data on schema changes. These rules reflect hard-won lessons from past sessions where things went wrong. But Johnny cannot reliably tell when Codex actually follows the rules, and he has no way of knowing whether they are well-specified enough to be useful. To anchor rules in his development workflow, he decides to use Zoro . 1

## 4.1 Enriching the Plan 

Like any other normal Codex session, Johnny types his task directly into the Codex interface. This full-stack feature spans backend data modeling, LLM-based categorization, and front-end components: 

> help me build a feature that auto-organizes employee log entries by sentiment category. managers should be able to preview the suggested groupings, drag and drop entries to adjust them, and apply the final organization

Codex generates an initial development plan (see Appendix A.3.1). The plan is technically reasonable, but it doesn’t reference any of Johnny’s rules. Without them embedded in the plan, there’s a danger that his rules won’t be followed. To view the plan, Johnny opens Zoro ’s Visualization tab. Zoro 

has detected that Codex created a plan and enriched it. Johnny sees an interactive plan outline (Figure 4 A ) — each step and substep is expandable, and rules appear embedded directly in the step it gov-erns (Figure 4 B ). Where Codex’s plan simply says “Add Category model to the backend schema,” Zoro has introduced a dedicated substep to handle the migration and attached two rules to it. The rules are no longer floating in an AGENTS.md file; they are woven into the plan at the exact moment they need to be followed. 

> 1See Appendix A.2 and A.7 for setup and rule creation details.

Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Figure 3: Zoro Ecosystem. Zoro consists of two parts: 1) a python package called zoro-cli and 2) a rule visualization interface for the user to manage rules and sessions, audit enforcement evidence, and add in-situ notes. zoro-cli exists to constrain the agent during enforcement so that the agent has a mechanism via the CLI commands to report evidence that the rules are followed; how the agent must use zoro-cli is detailed in ZORO.md . The .zoro folder in the target repository acts as a shared communication layer between Zoro ’s interface and the coding agent; it is where the enriched plan, rules, enforcement evidnece, and in-situ notes are stored.                       

> Original Agent Plan Step 1: Category System Foundation
> Step 1.1: Add Category model to backend schema (default category color: grey); Add
> category_id field to LogEntry records Step 1.2: Create a Category service in api/categories.py to support CRUD operations Step 1.3: Implement a category sidebar view and integrate it with the main log entry interface
> Step 2: AI Auto-Organization. . . Step 3: Preview Dialog and Frontend. . . Zoro-Enriched Plan Step 1: Category System Foundation
> Step 1.1: Add Category model to backend schema (default to user-specified color) - Ask the user to choose the default category icon color - Add category_id to LogEntry records - Backfill existing data safely
> RULE A: Always ask the user before introducing a new color RULE B: Ensure all schema changes properly backfill or migrate existing data
> Step 1.2: Create Category service in api/categories.py
> RULE C: Follow existing repository patterns for consistency
> Step 1.3: Define frontend types and register CRUD endpoints - Create category interface in frontend/src/types
> - Register endpoints in frontend/src/services/api.ts
> RULE D: API methods must return typed domain objects RULE E: Keep frontend types and backend models synchronized
> Step 1.4: Implement category sidebar and main log entry interface
> RULE F: Handle deletions inline (avoid browser confirm dialogs) RULE G: Use shared design system components instead of MUI Step 2: AI Auto-Organization. . . Step 3: Preview Dialog and Frontend. . .

Before handing the plan to Codex, Johnny can edit step descrip-tions, reorder substeps, or insert new ones (Figure 4 C ). He also sets enforcement levels for each rule directly on the plan outline: 

non-strict , where the rule surfaces as guidance but doesn’t require proof; strict , where Codex must provide explicit evidence before advancing; and testable , where Codex must additionally run exe-cutable unit tests for each rule (Figure 4 D ). Rule A is strict — he does not want Codex quietly choosing a color. He marks Rule B 

as strict and testable — he has seen data inconsistencies compound before and wants proof the migration ran. Rule C is non-strict —he wants the agent to be reminded of this rule but doesn’t need hard evidence. With enforcement levels set, the plan is ready. 

4.1.1 Implementation. Zoro’s enrichment feature is implemented as follows: Zoro detects that Codex has generated a plan by contin-uously polling Codex’s local chat log, which Codex writes to disk automatically (see Figure 3 2 3 ). Once the plan is detected, Zoro 

sends it alongside Johnny’s full ruleset to GPT-5.3, which cross-references the two and produces the enriched plan: decomposing steps, attaching relevant rules to each, and flagging appropriate en-forcement levels based on rule metadata (see Figure 3 4 ). Rules are structured as JSON objects with metadata including enforcement level, category, confidence score, decay score, and contextual scope — this metadata gives the LLM rich context for deciding which rules are relevant to which steps. Zoro writes the enriched plan to logpose/.zoro and renders it on the interface for the user to interact with (see Figure 3 5 6 7 ). 

## 4.2 Enforcing the Rules 

Seeing that Zoro has enriched the plan, Johnny types: "execute the plan!” on the Codex interface. On Zoro ’s Visualization tab, Johnny watches Step 1.1 flip to a yellow “in progress” indicator (Figure 4 E ). Codex begins generating code for the Category model. Because 

Rule A is strict , Codex pauses mid-execution and asks Johnny whether gray is an acceptable default color. Johnny chooses green — the same green used in the app’s header. This is a rule that might normally go unnoticed, but it gets enforced because it is embedded into Zoro ’s plan. Codex logs the evidence using zoro prove-rule 

and generates code the rest of the step, then attempts to advance to Step 1.2 . The CLI stops it: Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al. 

Figure 4: Zoro ’s Visualization Interface. The user can see all vibe coded sessions that used the Zoro protocol on the left. They can interact with the plan by adding, moving, or deleting rules from each step of the plan. They can also further re-shape the plan, both manually or by calling an LLM. As the agent codes, users can track its progress, audit enforcement evidence, and add in-situ notes. (More details on the Supervision , Rule Learning , Rule Review , and Rule Management tabs can be found in Appendix A.5, A.6 , and A.7).           

> Error: Cannot mark step-1.1 as complete. Unverified rules: rule-b (Ensure all schema changes properly backfill or migrate existing data) Please verify all strict rules using zoro prove-rule before completing the step.

Codex is forced back to handle the migration. It generates a backfill script for all existing LogEntry records, runs a unit test to verify it, and submits proof. On the interface, Johnny watches the enforcement evidence roll in for Step 1.1 in real time. For each rule, the enforcement panel surfaces a plain-language summary of what was done, the relevant code artifact (Figure 4 F ), and — for testable rules — the unit test and its result(Figure 4 G ), which is shown in Figure 4 and Appendix A.3.2. With both rules satisfied, Codex marks Step 1.1 complete. Johnny didn’t need to dig through the codebase to verify the migration ran — the proof came to him. As the session continues and enforcement evidence accumulates, he has an audit trail grounded in actual code and actual tests. 

4.2.1 Implementation. The plan is executed as follows: Codex reads the plan from logpose/.zoro and begins working through it step by step (see Figure 3 2 3 ). Because ZORO.md is loaded into its context, Codex knows it cannot simply barrel through the plan – at each step, it must provide explicit evidence that rules were followed before it moves on (see Figure 3 4 5 ). Enforcement is driven by a combination of ZORO.md and zoro-cli .

ZORO.md is generated on initialization and prepended to the repos-itory’s existing rules file (e.g., AGENTS.md ), ensuring the agent loads it at the start of every session. Rather than a sprawling set of guidelines, ZORO.md gives the agent two CLI commands: 

zoro update-step and zoro prove-rule . We rely on the fact that coding agents always read their own terminal outputs; thus every CLI response is a reminder of ZORO.md ’s protocol: asuccess-ful command tells the agent what to do next, and a failed one tells it exactly what it missed and what it must do to fix it (e.g. if the agent marks a step complete before enforcing all strict rules, the CLI rejects the command and returns an error listing what rules it needs to prove). Since the CLI output re-encodes the protocol at every step, it prevents ZORO.md from context rot. 

## 4.3 Evolving the Ruleset 

Because the evidence is on the enforcement panel, Johnny can evaluate not just whether a rule was followed, but whether the rule itself was good enough. While reviewing the evidence for Rule B, he realizes the migration ran correctly, but the rule was too vague to capture what he actually wanted. He clicks directly on the enforcement evidence and adds a note: 

> this worked but migrations should live in the migrations folder. . . also it didn’t tell me how to run it. maybe also check that prior schema relationships didn’t break?

His feedback is immediate and grounded in a specific artifact (Figure 4 H ). As the session continues, he annotates other rules the same way — flagging gaps, adding expectations, capturing im-plementation details he wants to encode going forward. The cycle of Codex writing code, submitting proof, and Johnny reviewing evidence continues through Steps 1.2 through 3. Some steps move Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Figure 5: Batch Rule Refine Modal. Users click Evolve to access this modal and iterate through all the refined rules. For each refined rule, they can see the rule applications for it, and make edits to the newly refined rule as needed. 

quickly because their rules are non-strict; others are slower due to enforcement. By the end of Step 3 , Johnny has shipped the feature and has a clear record of how every rule was applied along the way. After Codex completes the plan, Johnny sees a Rule Review sec-tion (see Appendix A.6 for figure). The in-situ notes he left through-out the session are aggregated alongside the enforcement evidence he annotated. It functions like a code review, except instead of re-viewing code, Johnny reviews where his rules were applied and where they fell short. He clicks Evolve Rules . Zoro takes all accumu-lated notes and proposes updated rule definitions that incorporate them (Figure 5 I ), which Zoro renders in a diff view. Johnny steps through each rule and can accept a proposal as-is, edit it inline before accepting (Figure 5 J ), or reject it entirely (Figure 5 K ). Only accepted changes are saved back to the ruleset (Figure 5 L ). The rule refinement for Rule B is seen on Figure 5; the rule went from something Codex could interpret loosely to something precise enough to enforce. Johnny accepts it, and continues to review the other rules. The updated rules are saved and will be used to enrich the the plan in the future. What started as a loosely maintained markdown file has become a living, evolving ruleset — one that gets more precise and more trustworthy every time Johnny and Codex build something together. 

4.3.1 Implementation. Zoro ’s evolve feature works as follows: in-situ notes are saved directly to logpose/.zoro , attached to the specific enforcement evidence they annotate (see Figure 3 2 ). When a user clicks “ Evolve ,” Zoro loads all in-situ notes from 

logpose/.zoro , groups them by rule, and sends them alongside the current ruleset to an LLM for rule refinement (see Figure 3   

> 34

). Once users approve the changes, the new rules are saved to the ruleset in logpose/.zoro (see Figure 3 5 6 7 ). In Zoro ,there is also way to view the rules and manage them in the Rule Management Tab , which can be found in Appendix A.7. 

## 5 Technical Evaluation 

We begin with a controlled evaluation to determine if Zoro im-proves a coding agent’s ability to follow rules. Here, we isolated the impact Enrich-Enforce in Zoro before testing the full system ( En-rich–Enforce–Evolve ) with users. We ask: does Zoro meaningfully improve how agents implement code without degrading what is be-ing coded? For example, if the coding task is to create a start button, the what refers to if the button exists and functions as intended, while the how refers to if the button was implemented following the task’s development rules—such using the design system Button instead of an external component library. Zoro is considered suc-cessful if it is 1) equally effective at producing the feature ( what )and 2) is better at following the rules ( how ). 

## 5.1 Method 

We evaluated a total of 36 vibe coding sessions across 9 implemen-tation tasks and 4 conditions. Tasks were drawn from two full-stack repositories developed from scratch for this evaluation: NoteSense 

and SnakeGame . NoteSense is a full-stack note-taking and sense-making application (22k lines of code) built with a TypeScript/React frontend, Python Flask backend, and SQLite database — integrating with OpenAI, Google Tasks, and Gmail for AI-assisted organiza-tion, task synchronization, and email export. It represents a more standard full-stack project with a conventional UI. SnakeGame is a full-stack browser game (11k lines of code) built with a Type-Script/React frontend and Node.js/Express backend and a SQLite database. It demands significantly more complex UI concerns: real-time game state management, continuous rendering, interactive graphics, and dynamic user input. It also incorporates accessibility testing via jest-axe and isolated component development through Storybook. Both repositories were built from scratch alongside project-specific coding rules, giving us full visibility into design and architectural decisions from the ground up. We evaluated five tasks for NoteSense and four for SnakeGame .Although the task count is small, each task represents a substantial, multi-step development problem spanning 500–5,000 lines of code. Tasks cover full-stack development, including UI components, data-base logic, system integration, and AI-assisted functionality (see Appendix B.1). Each task represents a multi-step, long-range devel-opment problem where agents must reason across large systems, rather than on short, isolated tasks that models can solve easily. We used Cline as the coding agent with Claude Sonnet 4.6 as the model for our technical evaluation. Cline is an open-source, model-agnostic tool widely adopted in professional development workflows, with 60k GitHub stars. It was chosen for this evaluation for two reasons: first, being open-source, its system prompt is fully transparent — unlike tools such as Claude Code or Codex, where the underlying system prompt is hidden; second, it provides detailed execution logs showing exactly where the agent modifies code within the repository, enabling annotators to post-hoc verify of Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al. 

whether development rules were followed. Claude Sonnet 4.6 was selected as a strong, general-purpose coding model. 

5.1.1 Conditions. To isolate the contributions of Zoro ’s compo-nents, we defined four experimental conditions: 

• No Zoro (Baseline) : Standard vibe coding. Agents execute tasks based on a normal plan. All rules are stored in AGENTS.md ,but they are not actively integrated into the plan. 

• Basic Zoro (No Enrich, No Enforce) : Agents mark steps as complete and rules exist in AGENTS.md , but they are not used to enrich the plan and the agent does not have to provide proof that they followed each rule. 

• Partial Zoro (Enrich, No Enforce) : The plan is enriched with rules, and the agent must mark steps as complete, but does not have to provide proof that they followed each rule. 

• Full Zoro (Enrich, Enforce) : The plan is enriched and rules are enforced, and the agent must mark steps as complete. The agent cannot complete steps until all rules are followed. For all conditions, we provided the task description and devel-opment plan, after which the agent generated code independently. If compiler errors occurred, we applied minimal patches to enable compilation and recorded the number of patches applied. The re-sulting implementations were then evaluated. 

5.1.2 Metrics. Because tasks vary in features, systems, and con-straints, a single generic rubric would fail to capture task-specific requirements. Thus, we define a specific rubric for each task. Each rubric specifies what must be implemented (feature completeness, the what ) and which task-specific development rules must be fol-lowed (rules followed, the how ): 

• Feature completeness measures whether the intended func-tionality was implemented and usable within the system. Partial implementations (e.g., backend logic without a usable front-end interface) were scored as incomplete, since the feature could not be tested within the application. 

• Rules followed measures whether the agent adhered to task-specific rules. If a rule was applied multiple times and was violated in any instance, it was marked as not followed. This scoring approach emphasizes consistent adherence and pro-vides a conservative estimate of rule-following behavior. Two annotators, both software engineers with at least five yeras of computer science experience, independently graded each task using these rubrics. Annotators reviewed both the generated code and the associated vibe coding chat history, since some rules gov-ern interactive behaviors (i.e. checking in with the user before installing a new package) rather than code alone. Annotators were compensated $200 each ($40 an hour). 

## 5.2 Results 

We first verify annotation consistency between the two raters. Us-ing Pierson’s correlation, we observe strong agreement across both 

rules followed (corr=0.93) and feature completeness (corr=0.85) , sug-gesting that our annotations are reliable for downstream analysis. 

5.2.1 Rules Followed was highest in Full Zoro . Overall, full Zoro 

had more rules followed than the other conditions, with a score of 0.80 ±0.08 ( μ, 95% conf). This result aligns with our expectations,              

> Condition Feature Completeness (𝜇 , 95% conf) Rules Followed (𝜇 , 95% conf) No Zoro 0.64 ±0.144 0.51 ±0.08 Basic Zoro 0.65 ±0.17 0.55 ±0.11 Partial Zoro 0.61 ±0.11 0.68 ±0.07* Full Zoro 0.77 ±0.13 0.80 ±0.08*

Table 1: Feature Complete and Rules Followed Avg. Scores.     

> * denotes significance ( 𝑝 <0.5) compared to No Zoro (Baseline)

as the Full condition combines all system capabilities. A one-way ANOVA reveals a statistically significant difference across condi-tions for rule following (𝑝 < 0.05 ). Post hoc pairwise paired t-tests with Holm-Bonferroni correction showed that Full Zoro signifi-cantly outperformed all other conditions ( 𝑝 < 0.05 ), and Partial 

Zoro significantly outperformed No Zoro (𝑝 < 0.05 ). All other pairwise differences are not statistically significant. This pattern suggests that individual components show some improve-ments in the agent’s ability to follow rules, but Zoro ’s largest gains are when enrichment and enforcement are combined. 

Figure 6: Rules Followed 

Notably, even in the best condition, rules are followed only 80% of the time. A qualitative analysis of the rules suggests that failures often stem not from the agent’s inability to follow the rules, but from limitations in the rules themselves. Rules frequently contain ambiguities, gaps, or unintended loopholes. Agents tend to follow rules “to the letter,” which can lead to behavior that satisfies the literal text while diverging from the intended human meaning (see Appendix B.2), suggesting that static rulesets are insufficient for re-liable vibe coding. To achieve true consistency, rules must be treated as evolving artifacts – continuously refined as misinterpretations and edge cases emerge. 

5.2.2 Feature Completeness in Zoro is on par with standard vibe coding. We observe similar levels of feature completeness across all conditions. Full Zoro achieved the highest score 0.77 ±0.13, which is 0.10 than any other condition. However, a one-way ANOVA reveals that these differences are not statistically significant. While a larger sample size may reveal a bigger trend, it is more important that rules are followed without dimming feature-completeness. Our results indicate that Zoro ’s value remains centered on how a task is performed (rules) rather than what is implemented (features). Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

Figure 7: Feature Completeness 

5.2.3 What types of rules does Zoro work best for? We investigate which rules benefit most from enforcement. Our data reveals a meaningful distinction between two categories: coding rules and 

process rules . Coding rules govern how code should be written — for example, naming conventions, API structure, or formatting patterns that are visible directly in the codebase. Process rules , by contrast, govern what the agent must do while writing code, such as running a migration after a schema change or requesting confirmation be-fore a destructive action. These rules encode explicit human intent that cannot be inferred by looking at the code alone. For process rules, rule following rises from 35% in standard vibe coding to 87% in the full system. For coding rules, the gain is more modest, from 59% to 75% (see full table in Appendix B.3). This makes intuitive sense: coding agents can already pick up on coding rules by recog-nizing patterns in the existing codebase, and as models improve, enforcement may become less necessary. Process rules, however, capture intent that leaves no trace in the code itself, making both enrichment and enforcement essential. 

Figure 8: Process Rules 

## 6 User Study 

We conduct a user study with the full Zoro system ( Enrich-Enforce-Evolve ) to explore the following research questions (RQs): 

• RQ1 : What benefits does Enrich-Enforce-Evolve provide? 

• RQ2 : How does Zoro change users’ vibe coding behaviors? 

Figure 9: Coding Rules 

• RQ3 : How does Zoro change users’ cognitive strategies when vibe coding? 

## 6.1 Participants 

We recruited twelve participants (7F, 5M) via word-of-mouth and snowball sampling. All participants had at least five years of coding experience and vibe coded frequently. 10 participants used rules files on a daily basis. Four participants were PhD students across technical fields, and the remaining eight were industry software en-gineers or data analysts. Following approval from our Institutional Review Board (IRB), we conducted 90-120 minute sessions with each participant, during which they used rules to vibe code two tasks using Zoro . For consistency, Codex was chosen as the coding agent, which all participants were familiar with. Participants were compensated $50 for their time. 

## 6.2 Procedure 

Each session followed a consistent structure: 

Onboarding (15 min) . Sessions began with a walkthrough of the core features on Zoro ’s interface. Setup and Repo Selection (15 min) . The facilitator helped them set up Zoro and upload their ruleset from an existing AGENTS.md . Participants chose to vibe code between two setups: a repository and rules they brought themselves, or Poneglyph , a full-stack journaling app with a ruleset that we provide, which they were asked to add rules to. 

Brainstorm and Complete 2 Tasks (30–45 min per task) . Partici-pants brainstormed their first task; after completing the first task, they brainstormed a second task in the same repository, optionally added more rules they wanted in their ruleset. Tasks were self-contained and representative of everyday development work — not trivial, but scoped to what a developer could realistically tackle in a session. For both tasks, participants were instructed to think aloud. After Zoro generated an initial plan, participants reviewed the rules and selected which to strictly enforce (and test). They then completed the task with Codex and Zoro , reviewed enforcement evidence, and wrote in-situ notes. After each task, participants performed batch rule refinement. 

Interview (15 min) . Each session concluded with a semi-structured interview exploring participants’ experiences with Zoro , their mindset and behaviors around vibe coding with active rules, and reflections on how the tool compared to their existing workflows. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al. 

Seven participants chose their own repositories spanning re-search and personal projects, while five used Poneglyph (see Ap-pendix C). Notably, several participants who brought their own repositories treated the session as a real working session, intending to actually use the code produced. An author conducted open cod-ing of notes and transcripts, iterating on emerging codes at research meetings with the broader team to identify recurring themes. 

## 7 User Study Results 

In total, participants enforced 166 rules (110 unique). Approximately 10-15 rules were included in each plan, and participants enforced average of 9.17 rules per session. Participants who trusted agents tended to enforce fewer rules, while more skeptical participants enforced more. 10/12 participants found it helpful that the rules and enforcement evidence were visible on the interface; the other two found it useful but felt a more compact representation of the same information would be better. 10/12 participants made use of the in-situ notes to evolve rules they weren’t satisfied with; the remaining two did not because their rules were well-specified enough to not require refinement. All 12 participants indicated they would use a system like Zoro in their everyday workflows. 

Figure 10: Rules Followed 

We found that rule enforcement improved significantly from Task 1 to Task 2, consistent with our expectation that rules are initially underspecified and benefit from refinement. In Task 1, participants enforced rules from their own rulesets, achieving a pass rate of 77.9% (60/77). By interacting with Zoro , participants surfaced underspecified rules and refined them before Task 2, where the pass rate rose to 94.4% (84/89). Of rules refined after Task 1, 76.5% were re-enforced in Task 2, and 92.3% of those successfully passed, highlighting that because rules are reused across sessions, refining them has lasting impact on enforcement accuracy. 

## 7.1 RQ1: What benefits does 

## Enrich-Enforce-Evolve provide? 

7.1.1 Enrich + Enforce makes vibe coding auditable. Participants were able to audit and debug their vibe coding process with Zoro .They contrasted Zoro with standalone vibe coding, where the experience amounted to, as P5 described, "staring at an empty win-dow and hoping for the best" while the agent produced dozens of changed files with little explanation. With Zoro ‘s enriched plan and enforcement evidence, "you are more aware of what is happen-ing in the background — you know what is being applied versus not applied" (P4). P12, an ML engineer translating her research paper to code, required the agent to cite how each line of code mapped to variables for each math equation in her paper. The enforcement evidence allowed her to trust the code generated was actually fol-lowing her math, and she explained: "when something fails, it is helpful to know that the implementation is faithful, so you know the issue is with [my] algorithm rather than with a [coding] bug." This auditability also allowed participants to debug their rules. P6, who generated heatmaps from experimental data, hit a bug where his outputs were not loading. He traced through the enforce-ment evidence and found a rule that contained an incorrect path to a font file. Without Zoro , he would have otherwise had to, as he described, "prompt over and over again... you can’t even remember the rules you want the agent to follow." P3 concluded, "either way, I’m going to look for a way to verify the usage of these rules, so having these explicitly visualized saves me a lot of time." 

7.1.2 Enforcement as selective controls. Participants chose which rules to enforce in the plan. They primarily chose: 1) rules whose violation caused compounding downstream failures (type safety, compiler checks, testing), 2) compliance and security rules where hallucinated outputs carried real-world consequences, 3) recurring personal preferences they re-specified prompt by prompt. Participants did not enforce the same rules across both tasks. As they observed rules being followed, they began extending more trust to the agent. Of the 77 rules enforced in Task 1, 56 (72.7%) carried over to Task 2. P1 chose not to re-enforce rules like "import icons only from the icon registry", trusting that the rule being ex-plicitly mentioned the plan was sufficient. P3 described a threshold where, after seeing a rule pass, she would stop enforcing it, "as long as [she had] a way to see a historical base of when it has been used." 

7.1.3 Evolve makes rules dynamic. Zoro allowed users to precisely edit their rules. To P1, this made rules "a dynamic thing...[allowing you to] go more specific until you get what you want". Users only realize a rule is underspecified once they’ve seen it fail. P3 had rule prohibiting exposing personally identifiable information (PII) to users. However, the agent omitted the customer_uuid field entirely thinking it was PII. P3 resolved this by adding an in-situ note with an allowlist defining what did and did not constitute PII in her context. Vague rules require iterative tightening – as P11 put it, "if you are not really clear, [the LLM] just finds a loophole to "do" what you asked without actually doing it." Rather than regenerating the rules or appending them to the rules file, an approach P8 described as getting "messy very quickly" because "you lose track of what changed and why", Zoro ’s in-situ notes allowed participants to "modify rules in-place," keeping changes targeted and traceable. Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

## 7.2 RQ2: How does Zoro change users’ vibe coding behaviors? 

Based on their prior experience with coding agents, 9/12 partici-pants were initially skeptical that coding agents would follow their rules. After using Zoro to enforce their rules, however, they became more confident. The remaining three participants already trusted agents, but still appreciated how Zoro turned rules into active con-text they could visualize. As P6 put it: "if [ Zoro ] is validating and showing that it is following my rules then I am way more happy to put my trust in the system, because it is visually showing me exactly what it is doing." P11 similarly described trust being built through "proof that it happened." A direct consequence of this confidence was a marked reduction in supervision overhead. P5, an ML PhD student, described typically breaking his workflow into discrete verification stages — checking tensor data types, device placement, component modularization, and using dummy data to test procedures at each step— because he didn’t trust an agent to maintain these constraints end-to-end. In our study, he encoded them directly as rules and let Zoro en-force them in his place. The result was that his usual multi-stage verification process was externalized into the system itself. Seeing every rule surface and pass broke down his habitual skepticism: "All the rules passed and I’m shocked because I’m usually the manager and I don’t trust it." P11, vibe coding a rich text editor on Poneg-lyph , encoded a rule to not write unnecessary try-catch statements — a constraint he had little faith the agent would respect. Seeing the enforcement evidence surface and confirm the rule had been followed allowed him to visibly relax, stating "I would probably need something like this in bigger projects because it will get more chaotic — and if you have the proof that it followed the rules, then you don’t have to look inside the codebase and check each output." 

## 7.3 RQ3: How does Zoro change users’ cognitive strategies when vibe coding? 

Nine participants developed a strategic shift when vibe coding with 

Zoro — away from "what should I say in this prompt?" and toward "what rules should govern my plan?" A key reason is that rules and prompts operate at different scopes: a prompt must be re-specified every session, while a rule, once written, persists and compounds across future sessions. P8 articulated this the most explicitly: "It kind of is a different framework of developing because you end up being not only plan-focused, but now rule-focused as well... if I live in a world where I can see what rules are applying to my plans, and I can figure out that this rule is leading this plan astray, or this rule is really important to this plan — I can really think of it from a mindset of: these are the rules I need for my plans to operate 10, 20, 30 times more efficiently." Rather than treating a ruleset as a one-time setup cost, participants began reasoning about rules as the primary mechanism to compound the agent’s long-term usefulness. P7 connected this to a broader problem about the quality of vibe coding in general: 

"One concern with vibe coding is that you get loosey-goosey, but that loses the structure you need in traditional coding. Introducing rules at the forefront brings traditional coding back. You are thinking more strictly as a coder rather than just having a casual conversation." 

This shift toward rules-first thinking raises a natural question: does enforcing rules constrain the agent’s creative autonomy? In our study, participants developed a meta-strategy of enforcing rules where correctness mattered, and relaxing enforcement where they wanted the agent to exercise judgment. P8 referred to it as rules to be followed "to the letter" versus those to be "inspired by." For example, P6 chose not to re-enforce his "Use MATLAB Parula col-ormap by default" rule in Task 2, reasoning that for a new type of heatmap, the agent might independently select a better option. P7, who frequently plots data, left rules around SQL queries and backend packages unenforced "because I wanted the agent to have flexibility on what it thought was best." He instead reserved strict enforcement for rules about plot appearance, where he had strong preferences. This selective enforcement suggests that rules did not feel uniformly constraining; rather, they gave participants a way to deliberately choose between control and agent autonomy. 

## 8 Discussion 8.1 From Prompt Engineering to Rule Engineering 

In our user study, we saw a broader shift in the role of humans from prompt engineers to active shapers of agent behavior. Rules are not merely prescriptive instructions about low-level details (e.g. what color a button should be, or how a function should be named). As our technical evaluation demonstrated, process rules that surround decisions around agent autonomy, permissions, and oversight will always require human judgement. They are ultimately a type of policy: something that can be applied broadly to govern behavior across context. Enrich-Enforce-Evolve operationalizes this in vibe coding, anchoring rules to every step of the agentic pipeline, but the same principle applies across any agentic workflow. In vibe coding, the path of least resistance is to click approve agent suggestions, defer verification, and accumulate technical debt that surfaces later. Agents code at the speed of light, and it is only human to keep pace by accepting outputs without scrutiny. But for developers who care about shipping reliable code, this tradeoff is costly. Rules offer an alternative: rather than reviewing everything manually or accepting outputs blindly, developers can invest upfront in constraints that anchor agent behavior at runtime. The same tensions apply in other agentic workflows, in domains like email triaging, meeting summarization, and project manage-ment. A rule that requires checking for an existing Jira ticket before creating a new one, or that mandates a summary be sent after every meeting, encodes organizational process just as naturally as a rule that forbids installing unvetted dependencies. As agents take on more of these workflows, rules become the mechanism through which human intent — whether engineering standards or business processes — gets reliably carried forward. The paradigm shift, then, is this: if the last decade of software development was defined by the question of how to write better code, the next may be defined by the question of how to write better rules . Steering agent behavior through explicit, enforceable, and evolvable policies, rather than relying on implicit model behavior or ad-hoc prompting, may prove to be the defining human skill of the agentic era. 

## 8.2 Passive Context to Active Enforcement 

When designing Zoro , we observed that developers did not mainly struggle to express their intent; they struggled to trust their intent Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al. 

would be followed. Thus, the future of vibe coding will likely de-mand not just better rules, but better guardrails. Test cases are one such guardrail; they verify what an agent produces. Rule enforce-ment is another; it lets users control what an agent can do. Together, they form a complementary scaffolding that grants agents greater autonomy because their behavior is bounded and verifiable. In our current design, enforcement is grounded in unit tests and evidence traces. Participants in our user study suggested it could extend further: dedicated enforcement agents, multimodal checks over UI and system behavior, or validation of agent reasoning traces to ensure the agent considered specific constraints before acting. More broadly, enforcement need not rely on LLMs at all — typed interfaces, deterministic program logic, regex-style validators, and domain-specific policy engines are all viable mechanisms depending on the context. In this sense, Zoro is not just a system that enforces rules, but a foundation for treating enforcement itself as a design primitive in agentic systems. 

## 9 Limitations 

Our user study involved 12 sessions across two tasks, with partic-ipants being technically proficient developers who regularly en-gage in vibe coding. The tasks operated on single-developer-style codebases, and participants completed two tasks each; longitudinal studies with more diverse participants and a broader range of tasks would provide a richer understanding of real-world adoption. Our evaluation also focuses specifically on coding workflows; Enrich-Enforce-Evolve may behave differently in other agentic settings. Our technical evaluation was limited to 36 total cases due to the complexity of our tasks and the high computational cost of running the full enforcement pipeline end-to-end. Enforcement introduces non-trivial overhead, increasing token usage by approximately 4 ×

due to additional agent actions required. Expanding the evaluation with more diverse scenarios would strengthen our claims. We also encounter challenges as rule sets grow. While we intro-duced merge functionality to consolidate rules, Zoro does not yet handle conflicting rules and our methods for managing expanding context files remain imperfect. We can also introduce better meth-ods for rule creation; while Zoro handles this by a structuring rules from a pre-existing AGENTS.md file(see Appendix A.7, A.2, A.5), more work can be done to support users. Finally, Zoro is imple-mented as a Python package requiring manual setup. Participants felt that a lighter-weight form factor, such as a VSCode extension, could significantly improve accessibility. 

## 10 Conclusion 

Vibe coding has shifted the developer’s role from writing code to steering agents — but without mechanisms to enforce intent, that steering remains untrustworthy. Zoro addresses this by trans-forming rules files from passive documentation into active controls through the Enrich-Enforce-Evolve pattern Our technical evaluation shows that agents follow rules more reliably under this paradigm, and our user study reveals how active rules changes the experience of vibe coding itself. More broadly, Zoro reframes what it means for a developer to interact with rules. Rather than dropping constraints into a text file and hoping they stick, rules become anchored into every step of the coding process. As agents grow more autonomous, the question of how humans maintain meaningful control becomes increasingly important. Zoro offers one answer: make rules active, and let experience sharpen them. 

## Acknowledgments 

We thank Omar Shaikh, Vivian Liu, and Dora Zhao for their thought-ful feedback on earlier drafts of this paper. We are also grateful to those who provided ongoing support through discussions, idea exploration, and prototype testing. Finally, we thank our study participants for their time and insights. 

## References 

[1] Agents.md Community. 2024. AGENTS.md: A simple, open format for guiding coding agents. https://agents.md/. Accessed: 2026-03-28. [2] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Code: Agentic coding tool. https://www.anthropic.com/ news/claude-3-7-sonnet. Accessed: 2025-03-28. [3] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Code Documentation: Memory and Context Persistence. https://code.claude.com/docs/en/memory. Accessed: 2026-03-28. [4] Anthropic. 2026. How Claude Remembers Your Project (Claude Code Documen-tation). https://code.claude.com/docs/en/memory Accessed 2026-03-29. [5] Anysphere. 2024. Cursor: The AI-native Code Editor. https://www.cursor.com/. Accessed: 2026-03-28. [6] Shraddha Barke, Michael B James, and Nadia Polikarpova. 2023. Grounded copilot: How programmers interact with code-generating models. Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 7, OOPSLA1 (2023), 85–111. [7] Valerie Chen, Alan Zhu, Sebastian Zhao, Hussein Mozannar, David Sontag, and Ameet Talwalkar. 2025. Need Help? Designing Proactive AI Assistants for Pro-gramming. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-puting Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 881, 18 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714002 [8] Cline. 2025. Customization: Cline Rules. https://docs.cline.bot/customization/ cline-rules. Accessed: 2025-03-28. [9] Cline.bot. 2024. Cline: An open-source autonomous coding agent. https://docs. cline.bot/. Accessed: 2026-03-28. [10] Cursor. 2026. Rules (Cursor Documentation). https://cursor.com/docs/rules Accessed 2026-03-29. [11] Will Epperson, Gagan Bansal, Victor Dibia, Adam Fourney, Jack Gerrits, Erkang Zhu, and Saleema Amershi. 2025. Interactive Debugging and Steering of Multi-Agent AI Systems. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713581 [12] KJ Feng, Kevin Pu, Matt Latzke, Tal August, Pao Siangliulue, Jonathan Bragg, Daniel S Weld, Amy X Zhang, and Joseph Chee Chang. 2024. Cocoa: Co-planning and co-execution with ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10999 (2024). [13] Kasra Ferdowsi, Ruanqianqian (Lisa) Huang, Michael B. James, Nadia Polikarpova, and Sorin Lerner. 2024. Validating AI-Generated Code with Live Programming. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 

(Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 143, 8 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642495 [14] GitHub. 2026. Adding Repository Custom Instructions for GitHub Copi-lot. https://docs.github.com/copilot/customizing-copilot/adding-custom-instructions-for-github-copilot Accessed 2026-03-29. [15] Thibaud Gloaguen, Niels Mündler, Mark Müller, Veselin Raychev, and Martin Vechev. 2026. Evaluating AGENTS. md: Are Repository-Level Context Files Helpful for Coding Agents? arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.11988 (2026). [16] Google Cloud. 2025. What is vibe coding? https://cloud.google.com/discover/ what-is-vibe-coding. Accessed: 2026-03-28. [17] Gaole He, Gianluca Demartini, and Ujwal Gadiraju. 2025. Plan-then-execute: An empirical study of user trust and team performance when using llm agents as a daily assistant. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–22. [18] Md Naimul Hoque, Tasfia Mashiat, Bhavya Ghai, Cecilia D. Shelton, Fanny Cheva-lier, Kari Kraus, and Niklas Elmqvist. 2024. The HaLLMark Effect: Supporting Provenance and Transparent Use of Large Language Models in Writing with Interactive Visualization. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3613904.3641895 [19] Eric Horvitz. 1999. Principles of Mixed-Initiative User Interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’99) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 159–166. doi:10. 1145/302979.303030 [20] Andrej Karpathy. 2025. There’s a new kind of coding I call “vibe coding,” . Retrieved March 28, 2026 from https://x.com/karpathy/status/1886192184808149383 Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

[21] Majeed Kazemitabaar, Jack Williams, Ian Drosos, Tovi Grossman, Austin Zachary Henley, Carina Negreanu, and Advait Sarkar. 2024. Improving Steering and Verification in AI-Assisted Data Analysis with Interactive Task Decomposition. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (UIST ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 92, 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3654777.3676345 [22] Philippe Laban, Hiroaki Hayashi, Yingbo Zhou, and Jennifer Neville. 2026. LLMs Get Lost in Multi-Turn Conversation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06120 ICLR 2026 Oral (preprint: arXiv:2505.06120). [23] Philippe Laban, Jesse Vig, Marti Hearst, Caiming Xiong, and Chien-Sheng Wu. 2024. Beyond the Chat: Executable and Verifiable Text-Editing with LLMs. In 

Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (Pittsburgh, PA, USA) (UIST ’24) . Association for Computing Machin-ery, New York, NY, USA, Article 20, 23 pages. doi:10.1145/3654777.3676419 [24] Christine P. Lee, David Porfirio, Xinyu Jessica Wang, Kevin Chenkai Zhao, and Bilge Mutlu. 2025. VeriPlan: Integrating Formal Verification and LLMs into End-User Planning. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 247, 19 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714113 [25] Jenny T Liang, Chenyang Yang, and Brad A Myers. 2024. A large-scale survey on the usability of ai programming assistants: Successes and challenges. In 

Proceedings of the 46th IEEE/ACM international conference on software engineering .1–13. [26] Q. Vera Liao and Justin Vaughan. 2024. AI Transparency in the Age of LLMs: A Human-Centered Research Agenda. Harvard Data Science Review (online). https://hdsr.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/aelql9qy Accessed 2026-03-29. [27] Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang. 2024. Lost in the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 

12 (2024), 157–173. doi:10.1162/tacl_a_00638 [28] Ryan Lopopolo. 2026. Harness Engineering: Leveraging Codex in an Agent-First World. OpenAI Blog. https://openai.com/index/harness-engineering/ Accessed: 2026-03-27. [29] Jenny Ma, Riya Sahni, Karthik Sreedhar, and Lydia B. Chilton. 2025. Agent-DynEx: Nudging the Mechanics and Dynamics of Multi-Agent Simulations. arXiv:2504.09662 [cs.MA] https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.09662 [30] Jenny GuangZhen Ma, Karthik Sreedhar, Vivian Liu, Pedro A Perez, Sitong Wang, Riya Sahni, and Lydia B Chilton. 2025. Dynex: Dynamic code synthesis with structured design exploration for accelerated exploratory programming. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems .1–27. [31] Peya Mowar, Yi-Hao Peng, Jason Wu, Aaron Steinfeld, and Jeffrey P Bigham. 2025. CodeA11y: Making AI Coding Assistants Useful for Accessible Web Development. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 45, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713335 [32] OpenAI. 2024. Codex Guides: Introduction to AI Agents and AGENTS.md. https: //developers.openai.com/codex/guides/agents-md. Accessed: 2026-03-28. [33] OpenAI. 2026. Custom Instructions with AGENTS.md (Codex Documentation). https://developers.openai.com/codex/guides/agents-md/ Accessed 2026-03-29. [34] Yi-Hao Peng, Dingzeyu Li, Jeffrey P Bigham, and Amy Pavel. 2025. Morae: Proactively Pausing UI Agents for User Choices. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 198, 14 pages. doi:10. 1145/3746059.3747797 [35] Savvas Petridis, Benjamin D Wedin, James Wexler, Mahima Pushkarna, Aaron Donsbach, Nitesh Goyal, Carrie J Cai, and Michael Terry. 2024. Constitution-maker: Interactively critiquing large language models by converting feedback into principles. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces . 853–868. [36] Kevin Pu, Daniel Lazaro, Ian Arawjo, Haijun Xia, Ziang Xiao, Tovi Grossman, and Yan Chen. 2025. Assistance or Disruption? Exploring and Evaluating the Design and Trade-offs of Proactive AI Programming Support. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713357 [37] Omar Shaikh, Shardul Sapkota, Shan Rizvi, Eric Horvitz, Joon Sung Park, Diyi Yang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2025. Creating general user models from computer use. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1–23. [38] Shreya Shankar, Bhavya Chopra, Mawil Hasan, Stephen Lee, Bjoern Hartmann, Joseph Hellerstein, Aditya Parameswaran, and Eugene Wu. 2025. Steering se-mantic data processing with docwrangler. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology . 1–18. [39] Shreya Shankar, J. D. Zamfirescu-Pereira, Björn Hartmann, Aditya G. Parameswaran, and Ian Arawjo. 2024. Who Validates the Validators? Align-ing LLM-Assisted Evaluation of LLM Outputs with Human Preferences. In Pro-ceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. doi:10.1145/3654777.3676450 [40] Priyan Vaithilingam, Munyeong Kim, Frida-Cecilia Acosta-Parenteau, Daniel Lee, Amine Mhedhbi, Elena L Glassman, and Ian Arawjo. 2025. Semantic Commit: Helping Users Update Intent Specifications for AI Memory at Scale. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology .1–18. [41] Ruotong Wang, Ruijia Cheng, Denae Ford, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2024. Investigating and Designing for Trust in AI-powered Code Generation Tools. In 

The 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT ’24) . ACM, 1475–1493. doi:10.1145/3630106.3658984 [42] Litao Yan, Alyssa Hwang, Zhiyuan Wu, and Andrew Head. 2024. Ivie: Lightweight Anchored Explanations of Just-Generated Code. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Honolulu, HI, USA) (CHI ’24) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 140, 15 pages. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642239 [43] Litao Yan, Jeffrey Tao, Lydia B Chilton, and Andrew Head. 2025. Answering Developer Questions with Annotated Agent-Discovered Program Traces. In 

Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 29, 14 pages. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747652 [44] Qian Yang, JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Jessie Jia, and Asad Nabi. 2025. TrumanBench: Profiling LLMs’ Ability to Help Non-Programmers Modify a Real-World Code Base. (2025). [45] JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Eunice Jun, Michael Terry, Qian Yang, and Bjoern Hart-mann. 2025. Beyond code generation: Llm-supported exploration of the program design space. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1–17. [46] Xuanming Zhang, Sitong Wang, Jenny Ma, Alyssa Hwang, Zhou Yu, and Lydia B Chilton. 2024. JumpStarter: Human-AI Planning with Task-Structured Context Curation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03882 (2024). Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al. 

## A System A.1 Library and Frameworks 

Zoro ’s interface is written in Typescript and React. The backend is written in Python and Flask. The backend handles reads and writes to the 

.zoro directory to coordinate communication between the interface and the agent. For plan enrichment, rule refinement, and supervision, 

Zoro uses GPT-5.3, leveraging its extended context window to reason across long-range dependencies. 

## A.2 Setup and Rule Import 

Johnny initializes Zoro in his repository by running Zoro init –user-name Johnny in the root directory. This creates a .Zoro folder which serves as the shared workspace between Zoro and the coding agent. He then starts Zoro by running Zoro -api , which launches the 

Zoro frontend in a local browser window. To import his existing rules, Johnny navigates to the Rule Management tab and clicks the button to structure his existing AGENTS.md 

file into rules. Zoro parses the file, transforming each information block into a structured JSON ruleset saved to .Zoro . The rules are immediately displayed in the interface — in Johnny’s case, approximately 50 rules are extracted and ready to be reviewed, categorized, and assigned enforcement levels before his first session. 

## A.3 Example Plan and Evidence 

A.3.1 Example Initial Plan Generated by Codex. Below shows the example plan generated by Codex. 

Original Agent Plan 

Step 1: Category System Foundation 

Step 1.1: Add Category model to the backend schema (default category color: grey); Add category_id field to LogEntry records Step 1.2: Create a Category service in api/categories.py to support CRUD operations Step 1.3: Implement a category sidebar view and integrate it with the main log entry interface 

Step 2: AI Auto-Organization... 

Add a method to cluster log entries by sentiment using fuzzy string matching Create a /preview API endpoint to return AI categorization suggestions Implement logic to apply the selected organization 

Step 3: Preview Dialog and Frontend... 

Display category suggestions in expandable sections Support drag-and-drop adjustments for managers to refine groupings 

A.3.2 Example Enforcement Evidence for Rule B . Below shows the example enforcement evidence for Rule B .

Step 1.1: Add Category Model to backend schema 

• Ask the user to choose the default category color 

• Add category_id to LogEntry records 

• Backfill existing data safely 

RULE A [strict]: Always ask the user before making design decisions. 

Verification: User said “Default green color that is used in the header in the frontend” 

RULE B [strict] [testable]: Ensure all schema changes properly backfill or migrate existing data. 

Verification: Created migration script in backend/migrations/... 

Code Evidence 

# Run : flask db upgrade def upgrade () : for entry in LogEntry . query . filter_by ( category_id = None ). all () : entry . category_id = DEFAULT_CATEGORY_ID db . session . commit () 

Test Case 

def test_category_backfill () : assert all (e. category_id is not None for e in LogEntry . query . all () ) assert Category . query . get ( DEFAULT_CATEGORY_ID ). color == ' color - primary -500 '

Status: Passed 

Execution Time: 0.42s 

Runs: 1

## A.4 ZORO.md file 

Listing 1: ZORO Protocol Markdown Content 

# ZORO Protocol This file defines the required execution protocol for agents . Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

## Core Rule Before starting work , read `. zoro / zoro_plan .md `.For every plan step , the agent must : 1. Call ` zoro update - step <step -id > in_progress ` when work begins . 2. Call ` zoro prove - rule <step -id > -- rule " ... " -- evidence " ... " ` for each required rule . 3. Only after required rule evidence is submitted , call ` zoro update - step <step -id > completed `.## Hard Stops - Do not mark a step ` completed ` before required ` zoro prove - rule ` calls . - Do not start the next step while the current step is incomplete . - If evidence is missing or weak , remain on the current step and add better proof . ## Evidence Guidance ( Concise ) Evidence should be specific and audit - friendly : - What changed - Where it changed ( file / component ) - Why it satisfies the rule - Optional verification signal ( test result , output , screenshot note ) ## `prove - rule ` Command Shapes Use the non - test form when test evidence is not required : 

``` bash zoro prove - rule <step -id > -- rule " < rule ␣ text >" -- evidence " < what ␣ changed ␣ and ␣ why ␣ it ␣ satisfies ␣ the ␣ rule >" 

``` 

Use the test - evidence form for testable rules : 

``` bash zoro prove - rule <step -id > -- rule " < rule ␣ text >" -- evidence " < what ␣ changed ␣ and ␣ why ␣ it ␣ satisfies ␣ the ␣ rule >" -- test - name " < test_name >" -- test -command " < command >" -- test - result pass -- test - output " < summary >" -- test - file " <path >" 

``` 

## Example 

``` bash zoro update - step step -1 -1 in_progress zoro prove - rule step -1 -1 -- rule " Use ␣ repository ␣ pattern " -- evidence " Added ␣ UserRepository ␣ in ␣ backend / repositories / user_repository . py ␣ and ␣ refactored ␣ UserService ␣ to ␣ depend ␣ on ␣ it ." zoro update - step step -1 -1 completed 

``` 

# ## Example With Test Evidence 

``` bash zoro update - step step -2 -3 in_progress zoro prove - rule step -2 -3 -- rule " Strict ␣ testable ␣ rule :␣ API ␣ parsing ␣ must ␣ handle ␣ nested ␣ response ␣ fields " -- evidence " Updated ␣ parser ␣ in ␣ frontend / src / services / api . ts ␣ to ␣ read ␣ supervision . status ␣ and ␣ token_stats ␣ safely ." -- test - name " test_nested_response_parsing " -- test -command " pytest ␣ tests / backend / test_api_parsing . py ␣ -k␣ test_nested_response_parsing " -- test - result pass -- test - output "1␣ passed " -- test -file " tests / backend / test_api_parsing . py " zoro update - step step -2 -3 completed 

``` 

## A.5 Supervision and Rule Learning 

As Codex executes the enriched plan, Johnny monitors its progress through two collapsible floating windows accessible from the main interface. The window contains two components: a Supervisor Panel and Rule Learning Panel . The Supervisor Panel displays the current step, the rules being enforced, and a high-level status summary that updates in real time. For example, after Step 1.1 completes, the panel reads: 

On track — Codex has completed step 1.1, verified 2 strict rules, and is moving onto step 2. 

If the agent deviates from the protocol — skipping a step, failing to verify a rule, or becoming stuck — the panel surfaces the issue immediately. Johnny can pause the agent, redirect it, or prompt it to re-read ZORO.md . This provides a safety net for cases where the agent still deviates despite zoro-cli constraints. The Rule Learning Panel operates in parallel, surfacing candidate rules inferred from the current session. After Johnny confirms that new folders should default to green, Zoro proposes a new rule that all new icons will have default color green. He accepts it, ensuring that future sessions will default to this behavior without requiring him to prompt for it again. Together, the two panels allow Johnny to monitor execution and incrementally refine his ruleset without leaving the interface. The floating windows can be seen in Figure 11. 

## A.6 Rule Review 

The Rule Review interface in the Visualization tab can be seen in Figure 12. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al. 

Figure 11: Rule Management Tab 

Figure 12: Rule Review 

## A.7 Rule Management 

The Rule Management tab provides a structured interface for inspecting and organizing the full ruleset. Each rule is displayed as a card showing its title, description, category (e.g., ui , backend , workflow ), enforcement level, confidence score, and decay score. Confidence reflects how strongly a rule aligns with verified prior user behavior; decay captures how general or context-specific a rule is — higher decay indicates a narrowly scoped rule, while lower decay indicates one that applies broadly. When rules are first initialized from AGENTS.md , both scores are set to baseline values and update as rules are applied, refined, or merged over time. Inline controls allow Johnny to edit any rule, adjust its enforcement level, or remove it entirely. Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

On the right side of the interface, a set of organizational tools allows Johnny to consolidate his ruleset. He merges overlapping categories — for example, combining ui and ui-ux into a single unified category — and deduplicates similar rules, such as collapsing “Buttons should be imported from the design system” and “Avoid importing buttons from external libraries” into one precise, non-redundant rule. New rules can also be added manually at any time. Learned rules from the Rule Learning Panel and refined rules from the Evolve stage both appear here, keeping the full ruleset visible and editable in one place. This tab is not part of the primary session workflow; it is a persistent management surface that Johnny can return to at any time to audit, reorganize, and improve his rules independent of any active session. The Rule Management interface can be seen in Figure 13. 

Figure 13: Rule Management Tab 

## B Technical Evaluation B.1 Evaluation Tasks 

Name Description Primary Technical Focus 

AI-powered Note Organization Automatically organizes notes into folders using LLMs, with chunking, folder preview, drag-and-drop, and grounded AI chat for querying notes. Semantic content transformation, bulk state updates, human review before commit Calendar Tracking Displays note activity per day, week, and month, with day-view drill-down linking back to original notes. Derived views over persistent state, aggregation, navigation across rep-resentations Google Tasks Synchronization Adds bidirectional sync with Google Tasks using OAuth and database migration, including previews, conflict resolution, and redundant-update avoidance. Cross-system synchronization, au-thenticated API integration, conflict handling Search and Version History Supports search across current and historical notes, diff visualization, partial revert, and migration of existing notes into the new representation. Temporal data modeling, schema evolution, reversible state changes Email Export with LLM Assis-tance Sends highlighted note sections to an LLM for feedback or rewriting, then inte-grates with Gmail for export using OAuth. LLM-mediated transformation be-fore external side effects, permis-sioned integration 

Table 2: NoteSense tasks and the distinct technical capabilities they exercise. Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Ma et al. 

Name Description Primary Technical Focus 

Settings and Theme Management Adds a settings page for fonts, colors, and themes via a color picker, along with named theme saving and a leaderboard/stats page. Persistent user preferences, param-eterized UI customization Multiple Profiles Supports creating and selecting profiles, each with its own settings, theme, and score history, while interacting correctly with the leaderboard. Scoped persistence, profile isolation, per-entity state management Gameplay Depth Introduces configurable game variations such as power-ups, speed, and custom snake, head, and food designs, with settings grouped into levels. Configuration-driven game logic changes, coupling UI state to run-time behavior Game Hub and Profile Switching Enables users to share and favorite themes and game designs in a hub, while applied copies remain local to the user. Shared artifact browsing, copy-vs-local ownership semantics Multiplayer Mode Adds two-player support with separate controls and colors, while the leaderboard tracks performance under shared settings and themes. Concurrent interactive state man-agement, synchronized multi-entity gameplay 

Table 3: SnakeGame tasks and the distinct technical capabilities they exercise. 

## B.2 Example of Agents Exploiting Vague Rules 

Rule Task What the agent did Why it failed 

After a user action that changes state or data, the UI must reflect the change immediately without re-quiring a hard refresh Show updated sync status after Google Tasks sync completes in NoteSense Agent called 

window.location.reload() 

after sync completed. Sync status updated correctly after the reload. The rule states the UI must reflect changes “without requiring a hard refresh” — the user did not have to refresh manually, so the agent considered the rule satisfied. The intended behavior was to update local state or refetch in place, preserving scroll position and UI context. The rule’s ambiguity around program-matic reloads left a loophole the agent exploited in a technically compliant but undesirable way. Shared interactive compo-nents include Storybook stories (default and key variants) Add a theme preview com-ponent to the Game Hub in SnakeGame Agent created a single default story (export const Default = () => <ThemeCard />; ) with no stories for locked themes, favorited state, applied state, or empty hub view. The rule requires “default and key variants” but never defines what a key variant is. The agent satisfied the literal requirement with one story and stopped. States like locked or already-applied themes — the most likely sources of user confusion — were never docu-mented or accessibility-checked. 

Table 4: Vague Rule Examples 

## B.3 Rules Followed for Coding Rules and Process Rules 

Condition Process Rules (𝜇 , 95% conf) Coding Rules (𝜇 , 95% conf) No Zoro 0.35 ±0.20 0.59 ±0.10 Basic Zoro 0.49 ±0.14 0.59 ±0.13 Partial Zoro 0.72 ±0.20 0.66 ±0.08 Full Zoro 0.87 ±0.11* 0.75 ±0.07 Zoro : Active Rules for Reliable Vibe Coding Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA 

## C User Study Participants and Tasks 

Participant Age, Gender, Occupation Repository and Rules Task 1 Task 2 

P1 23F, SWE @ Big Tech Poneglyph Summarize Journal Entries Auto-organize journal entries P2 29F, SWE @ Big Tech Full-stack passion project for teach-ing ML to HS kids Create a new learning model Use rules to clean up repo P3 27F, Data Analyst @ Startup Sandboxed repo of consumer data and analysis Create plots and a business report from existing SQL queries Run another SQL → Insights pipeline P4 27F, SWE @ Big Tech Poneglyph Select a prompt and create dynamic responses Auto-tag journal entries P5 27M, 5th year PhD in ML ML research project repo Translate JAX to PyTorch Modularize translation components P6 26M, 4th year PhD in Computer Graphics Graphics research project: heatmaps for contrast/lumi-nance Display-quality heatmap of contrast vs peak luminance Scatterplot of display parameters on heatmap P7 26M, 2nd year PhD in Econ Econ research project on lightning strike data Correlational analysis of strike time vs current Visualize spatial correlation across BC with heatmap P8 28M, SWE @ Startup iOS text-to-speech project Allow AI chat history to persist Chunk paper text with visual signal-s/icons P9 25F, SWE @ Big Tech Poneglyph Create settings component (lan-guage/aesthetics) Allow image uploading P10 26F, SWE @ Startup Poneglyph GPT-5.4 generate image/comic strip from journal Create landing page P11 25M, SWE @ Startup Poneglyph Rich text editing (MS Word-like) Rich image editing P12 27F, 3rd year PhD in ML ML research project repo Translate part of paper to code Translate next part of paper to code 

Table 5: Participant demographics, repositories, and tasks. Full-width version for 2-column layout. 

Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009